Received 2024 Mar 22; Accepted 2024 Jun 24; Issue date 2024.

Introduction

While plants are sometimes considered as stereotyped organisms,
incapable of the rich interactions with the environment that
characterise animals, plant biology delivers us a different picture.
Plants can perform a wide range of complex behaviours, related to their
growth, development and maintenance, such as a variety of tropic
movements (e.g., phototropism, chemotropism, thermotropism, etc.),
nastic movements (i.e., non-directional responses to external stimuli),
or even locomotion (for instance, in certain motile algae). This has led
some authors (e.g., Trewavas 2015; Mancuso 2018; Gagliano 2018;
Novoplansky 2019; Calvo 2023) to argue that plants are autonomous
cognitive agents. Rather than merely reacting to environmental
conditions, plants are seen by these authors as capable of a variety of
intelligent or learning-informed actions, such as exploration, guessing
or prediction. But even if we accept these cognitivist reconstructions
of plant behaviour, it is natural to wonder how plant intelligence
compares with that of animals or humans. After all, if we discover that
plants’ cognitive abilities are substantially limited by some–possibly
non-anthropocentric (but rather “biogenic”; Lyon 2006)–standards, then
we would have good reasons to take a more cautious or even sceptical
view (e.g., Adams 2018, Taiz et al. 2019; Mallat et al. 2020). A crucial
question at this juncture is: is it possible to measure the cognitive
sophistication of a plant?

Cognition is generally understood as the ability to generate “flexible
goal-oriented behavior through information processing” (Andrews and
Monsó 2021, p. 3). Accordingly, we can define “cognitive sophistication”
as the degree of flexibility involved in a goal-oriented behaviour.
Clarifying the notion of “flexibility” involved in this definition is
one of the aims of this article. When considering animals, common
criteria for assessing their cognitive abilities and sophistication
include whether they exhibit problem-solving abilities such as object
manipulation (Parker and Gibson 1990; Osvath and Osvath 2008), spatial
reasoning (Gibson et al. 2011) or tool use (Boesch 1991), social
cognition involving empathic responses (Preston and de Waal 2004), a
theory of mind (Penn and Povinelli 2007) or social learning (Whiten et
al. 2009), and self-awareness (in terms of self-recognition or
self-agency; e.g., Gallup 1998). Many of these criteria are
inappropriate for assessing plant cognition, either because they are too
“zoocentric” (e.g., tool use or a theory of mind) or because they are
difficult or impossible to detect experimentally in plants (e.g.,
self-awareness).

Communication has been extensively studied in animals since Bradbury and
Vehrencamp (1998) and Maynard-Smith and Harper (2003), and has also
attracted the attention of many plant biologists (e.g., Gagliano 2012;
Karban 2021) and linguists (Bonato et al. 2021) as a proxy for
identifying cognitive abilities in plants. As a field, plant
communication encompasses at least two broad categories of phenomena. On
the one hand, we have natural communication between plants, mediated
chemically or acoustically. On the other hand, we have artificial
communication between human experimenters and plants, usually achieved
by electrical stimulation, which is increasingly used to implement
sustainable biotechnologies (e.g., Li et al. 2021; Garcia-Servín et al.
2021). Although the ultimate goal of this interaction is to gain control
over the plant’s behaviour, it can still be considered a form of
communication in that this goal is achieved by establishing protocols
for the transmission and exchange of information between the human
experimenter and the plant.

In Sect. 2, I shall provide a brief overview of both lines of research.
Although I shall focus on the latter in the remainder of the article,
the approach developed here might be profitably applied to analyse
plant-plant communication as well. In Sect. 3, I shall present my
proposal, i.e., to use Chomsky hierarchy and automata theory as tools
for assessing the cognitive sophistication involved in plant’s
communication. Chomsky’s hierarchy was originally introduced by Chomsky
(1959) to identify differences between the generative power of different
types of grammars; computer scientists later proved that the categories
of Chomsky hierarchy are formally equivalent to different classes of
automata, allowing for a rigorous account of the differences between
their computational power and complexity (Kozen 1997; Hopcroft et al.
2008; Sipser 2020). More recently, formal linguists (Jäger and Rogers
2012; Fitch and Friederici 2012; Fitch 2014) have used it to
comparatively assess the cognitive resources required to perform
specific communicative interactions, both in humans and other animals.
In these applications, responsiveness to different grammars serves as a
comparative measure of an organism’s behavioural flexibility, which in
turn is assumed to provide information about its cognitive
sophistication.

In Sect. 4, I shall interpret the evidence about artificial interactions
with plants capable of rapid responses, such as Dionaea muscipula (Venus
flytrap), Mimosa pudica, or plants belonging to the genera Aldrovanda
and Drosera, using the conceptual tools discussed in the previous
section. Two main tentative results emerge from my analysis, which I
shall discuss in Sect. 5. First, given similar physiological and
experimental setups, Dionaea muscipula seems to outperform other
lineages, in the sense that it manages to process external, artificially
generated cues which are more complex according to Chomsky’s hierarchy.
This is interesting because it suggests that if we adopt Chomsky’s
hierarchy as a systematic measure of cognitive complexity, we may be
able to identify differences between the cognitive abilities of
different plant species (whereas it is usually tacitly assumed that most
plants have roughly the same level of cognitive sophistication). A
second, less encouraging result–at least for the proponents of plant
intelligence–is that Dionaea muscipula, despite outperforming other
lineages (at least in the specific communicative task I shall consider
in this article), shows a very reduced behavioural flexibility and
thus–according to our assumptions–limited cognitive complexity. Of
course, it may be that other species engaged in other communicative
interactions exhibit more complex behaviour; accordingly, I shall
suggest some possible directions for further research.

Plant communication

Plant communication is a rapidly expanding field. Despite a false start
in the 1970s–often attributed to the publication of Tompkins and Bird’s
(in)famous The Secret Life of Plants (1973) and the subsequent
controversies surrounding it–more solid evidence for the ability of
plants to communicate began to emerge in the 1990s. In the words of
Karban (2021), “communication occurs when a sender emits a cue perceived
by a receiver that changes the receiver’s behaviour” (p. 1). This
definition, implicitly accepted by most researchers, allows for the
inclusion of both “true” communication, which is achieved when the
sender intentionally chooses to emit a signal, and eavesdropping, where
an unintentionally emitted cue is exploited by the receiver (Bradbury
and Vehrencamp 1998; Maynard-Smith and Harper 2003). Notwithstanding
other possible interpretations, the intentional/unintentional
distinction in this characterisation allows for a naturalistic
elucidation as follows. Plants, like any other organism, live in
populations of related individuals. According to kin selection theory
(Hamilton 1964; Birch 2017), it is adaptive for many species to evolve
behaviours that increase the reproductive chances of relatives in
specific ecological circumstances. Under this widely accepted
assumption, some plant species (e.g., sagebrush, Artemisia tridentata;
Karban et al. 2006, 2013), might have evolved mechanisms to emit cues
(mainly volatile organic compounds; VOCs) to signal the presence of
competitors or attackers to their relatives. Communicative interactions
resulting from the evolution of such mechanisms would be “intentional”
as opposed to “unintentional” eavesdropping, where the behaviour of the
sender has not been selected.1

Recent studies on plant-plant communication have focused on two main
channels of plant communication, namely VOCs and acoustic vibrations
(AVs). VOCs can be emitted by roots to communicate the presence of water
or mineral resources (Kong et al. 2018), or to promote symbiotic
responses with fungi (Oldroyd 2013). However, the most studied type of
VOCs are probably airborne VOCs, such as terpenoids (Peñuelas et al.
1995; Peñuelas and Llusià 2004). Airborne VOCs are emitted by plants to
attract pollinators (Slavković and Bendahmane 2023), to communicate
danger and elicit defence (e.g., in tomato plants; Sugimoto et al.
2014), or to attract predators against their attackers (e.g., maize
seedlings attract wasps that parasitise the caterpillars that attack
them). Bonato et al. (2021) argues that terpenoids have a molecular
structure with combinatorial features that can be interpreted as
endowing them with syntactical and semantic properties. Although they do
not explicitly present the linguistic features of terpenoids in detail,
they seem to suggest that plant communication may have the same degree
of complexity as animal communication: for example, it is sensitive to
pragmatic, contextual, conditions and displays dialectic variants (like
birdsongs).

AVs have only more recently been taken into account, mainly thanks to
the work of Chamovitz (2012), Gagliano (2012; Gagliano et al. 2012) and
Appel and Cocroft (2014). According to Gagliano (2012), plants both
produce and perceive sound. Acoustic emissions are usually produced by
the release of tension in xylemic water transport systems, although
Gagliano et al. (2012) believe that they can be produced independently
of hydraulic processes. The vibrations of motor proteins such as myosin
could be used to produce specific sounds. Regardless of the
physicochemical origins of plant sound emission, Gagliano believes that
AVs can perform similar functions to those of VOCs. Mishra et al. (2016)
investigates the physiological mechanisms responsible for the perception
of AVs in plants. They also discuss the implications of this research
for biotechnology and agriculture. Sound treatments have been used in a
variety of plantations, particularly in China, to improve production.
Plants treated with AVs display increased immune responses against
diseases and insect pests (see also Hassanien et al. 2014).

The commercial relevance of plant communication has stimulated another
strand of research, that of artificial communication. To improve
biotechnology through plant communication, researchers need to find the
best way to elicit the desired responses. While VOCs and AVs are thought
to be natural channels for plant-plant communication, we do not yet know
enough about how they work. Nevertheless, there is another class of cues
that can be manipulated more efficiently: electric signals (ESs).
García-Servín et al. (2021) review different types of ESs in plants,
that is, action potentials (APs), variation potentials (VPs), and system
potentials (SPs). APs are the most widely studied and used to elicit
specific responses in plants. This is because APs are typically
generated by non-critical damage and, therefore, can be manipulated to
convey information without causing possible disruptions (Sukhova et al.
2017). Moreover, APs consist of sequences of single and fast spikes,
followed by short periods of depolarisation and repolarisation. This, as
we shall see in more detail in Sect. 4, makes them ideal candidates for
encoding digital information.

A good example of artificial communication is provided by Li et al.’s
(2021) experiments with soft actuators. Soft actuators (also called
phytoactuators; Volkov and Markin 2012) are non-invasive electrodes that
adapt to the surface of a plant. These are positioned on the surface of
the lobes of a Venus flytrap’s (Dionaea muscipula). The electrodes both
detect ESs from the plant and deliver APs to it. A communication channel
is then established via a Wi-Fi connection between the actuator and a
mobile application. By electrically stimulating the plant, the
researchers are able to open and close the lobes on demand and make the
plant grasp small objects. Meder et al. (2023) mention a number of other
examples and applications of artificial communication, such as the
creation of hybrid (plant-machine) devices capable of harvesting energy
and used as antennas to power sensors monitoring environmental
variables.

Chomsky and subregular hierarchies

Chomsky hierarchy is usually depicted as in Fig. 1 (from Fitch 2014, p.
348).

Fig. 1

A graphical representation of the equivalence between Chomsky hierarchy
and automata

[]

[]

There are four strictly nested classes of grammars–from the bottom up,
regular grammars, context-free grammars, context-sensitive grammars and
recursively-enumerable–which are equivalent to four classes of
automata–finite-state automata, push-down automata, linear bounded
automata and Turing machines, respectively. In many standard
presentations of Chomsky’s hierarchy (e.g., Hopcroft et al. 2008; Sipser
2020), context-sensitive and recursively enumerable grammars are lumped
into a single category, equivalent to Turing machines. Since the
difference between these grammars is not relevant in the present
context, we can follow this convention and simply assume that any
grammar that is not context-free but recursively enumerable can generate
strings that cannot be accepted by any other kind of automaton except
Turing machines.

A grammar can be formally defined as a tuple 𝒢 =  < Σ, V, S, R>. Σ is
the set of symbols that form the strings of the language L generated by
𝒢, called terminals. V is a set of variables called nonterminals (or
syntactic categories). Note that nonterminals are not symbols of L, but
rather “placeholders” for symbols of L. S ⊆ V is the initial symbol,
from which we can generate all the strings of L. R is a set of rules
that generate the strings of the language. Rules can be represented as
α → β, where α ⊆ V, β is a string that can be formed either of terminals
or nonterminals or both, and → means “replaces with”, or “consists of”.
From S and other nonterminals, rules can be applied recursively to
obtain strings containing only terminals. Thus, for instance, suppose
that we have a grammar 𝒢₁ with Σ = {a,,,b,,,c,,,d}, V = {S, T} and the
following rules (Jäger and Rogers 2012, p. 1958):

I

.

S

→

a

T

d

II

.

T

→

b

S

c

III

.

T

→

b

c

Then any string in our language will have the form aTd; i.e., it will
begin with a and end with d (rule I). T can be replaced by bc (rule
III), in which case we obtain the string abcd. This string has no
nonterminals and is therefore a string of L(𝒢₁) (i.e., the language
generated by 𝒢₁). Otherwise, we can replace T with another aTd (rule
II + rule I), to get abaTdcd. Since this string still contains
nonterminal variables, it is not a string of L(𝒢₁). Thus we have to
apply rule III or rule II again (and, in the latter case, rule I one
more time, and so forth). As result, we will generate an enumerable
infinite set corresponding to the language L
(𝒢₁) = {a,b,c,d,,,a,b,a,b,c,d,c,d,,,a,b,a,b,a,b,c,d,c,d,c,d,,,⋯} = {(a,b)^(n) • (c,d)^(n)|n ∈ ℕ⁺}
(where • is the concatenation symbol, which will be omitted from now
on).

𝒢₁ is an example of a context-free grammar. Although simple, 𝒢₁ displays
some important features and limitations of context-free grammars. First,
they allow something called “centre embedding”, i.e., the possibility of
nesting certain linguistic structures (in the case of 𝒢₁, abcd) within
others. Note that, despite the name, the “embedding” can be produced
also in lateral clauses–i.e., by “unpacking” nonterminal variables at
the beginning or end of a string (Fitch 2014, p. 352–353; this is not
evident in 𝒢₁ due to its simplicity). Second, and in virtue of centre
embedding, context-free grammars display an unlimited capacity for
symmetric counting. For instance, 𝒢₁ generates sequences of ab and cd
that are of equal length, regardless of the size of the portions. These
two features are absent in regular grammars. Regular grammars cannot
generate centre embedded sequences and can at most generate symmetric
sequences of symbols of fixed length. But even context-free grammars
have limitations. Although they are recursive to a certain extent,
context-free grammars are not generally recursive. Context-free grammars
cannot, for instance, generate languages like L
(𝒢₂) = {(a,b)^(n) • (c,d)^(n).(e,f)^(n)|n ∈ ℕ⁺}, which requires multiple
embeddings.2

In the context of comparative formal linguistics, there is a conjecture
that most linguistic structures in human languages can be generated by
context-free grammars (Miller 1967). This conjecture has been called the
“supra-regular hypothesis” by Fitch (2014). From the supra-regular
hypothesis, Fitch derives another hypothesis, the “dendrophilia
hypothesis”, which states that it is difficult or impossible for
non-human organisms to process supra-regular languages.3 This hypothesis
is not universally accepted. There is evidence that some birdsongs, for
instance, exhibit the complexity of context-free languages (Abe and
Watanabe 2011; but see Beckers et al. 2012 for a more sceptical view).
However, we can tentatively accept Fitch’s hypothesis here because it
helps us to limit possible applications of the Chomsky hierarchy to
plant behaviour. If non-human organisms cannot process supra-regular
languages, then they can only process regular languages. Our focus will
therefore be on the latter type of language. So far, we have
characterised Chomsky’s hierarchy in terms of grammars. Yet, when we
talk about whether or not organisms can “process” a language, it is
useful to think of Chomsky’s hierarchy in terms of automata. “To
process” in this context is to be able to recognise a particular string
as such and eventually produce a particular response–in computational
jargon, this is also called “to accept” the string. We can therefore say
that Chomsky’s hierarchy distinguishes between grammars of different
generative power and, equivalently, between automata of different
processing power (Kozen 1997). Most importantly for the present case,
finite-state automata (which are capable of processing regular
languages) are incapable of processing context-free languages. To better
understand this point, it is useful to characterise the notion of
“acceptance” in the context of finite automata.

A finite-state automaton–hereafter, simply “finite automaton”–is usually
defined by a quintuple  < Q, Σ, δ, q₀, F>, where Q is the finite set of
states of the automaton, Σ is the alphabet (which is equal to the set of
terminals generated by the grammar accepted by the automaton),
δ : Q × Σ → Q is the transition function, q₀ ⊆ Q is the initial state,
and F ⊆ Q is the set of accepting states (Sipser 2020, p. 35). There are
many possible mechanical descriptions of an automaton, which depend, for
instance, on whether we consider the string being processed to be read
by the automaton all at once and then parsed internally instead of as a
sequence inputted symbol by symbol; or whether we consider the automaton
to output intermediate responses (like in a Mealy machine; Mealy 1955)
instead of just the response resulting from reaching an accepting state.
In general, we can think of a finite automaton as a device that, by
reading a string, performs a number of transitions, determined by δ,
starting from the initial state. If, after reading all the symbols, the
automaton is in a state, q_(i) ⊆ F , it accepts the string, otherwise,
if q_(i) ⊄ F, it rejects it. In mechanical terms, we can think of a
computation that ends in an accepting state as a process that produces a
proper “reaction” on behalf of the automaton, while a computation that
ends in a non-accepting state simply halts. As mentioned above, finite
automata correctly process (i.e., terminate in accepting states) strings
generated by a regular grammar. When inputted to a finite automaton,
strings generated by supra-regular grammars can cause two kinds of
behaviour: either they make the automaton halt on a non-accepting state,
or they make the automaton incorrectly end on an accepting state.4

Before considering applications to plant behaviour, we need to introduce
some important classes of automata. Recall that the main goal of this
article is to account for differences in the degree of cognitive
sophistication in different plant behaviours. Now, if the dendrophilia
hypothesis is true (as we tentatively assume in this article), then all
animals and plants have at most the capacity to process regular
languages, i.e., they work like finite automata (we shall discuss in
what sense plants “process languages” in the following sections; for the
moment, let us just assume that they do). If that were all, then we
would have nothing interesting to say about different levels of
complexity in plants using Chomsky’s hierarchy. Finite automata are at
the bottom of the hierarchy. Therefore, animals and plants are at best
capable of the most limited processing skills, end of story. Luckily for
us, however, Jäger and Rogers (2012; Rogers et al. 2013) have identified
some interesting subclasses of regular languages, which display an inner
richness within this class of grammars. Jäger and Rogers distinguish
three main subregular languages, from the simplest to the most complex,
which are generated by corresponding grammars and accepted by specific
automata (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2

A Hasse diagram of subregular languages (from Avcu and Hestvik 2020). In
this article, we shall discuss only the highlighted subset of these
languages, corresponding to the automata discussed by Jäger and Rogers
(2012)

[]

[]

These are strictly local (SL), locally testable (LT), and locally
threshold testable (LTT) languages. SL languages are very simple. They
are generated to contain a fixed sequence of adjacent symbols k (e.g.,
the 2-sequence “ab”). The corresponding automata, called scanners
(Fig. 3A), read a string and, if they find the k-sequence, accept the
string, otherwise they reject the string (or halt without accepting).
Scanners are insensitive to any other properties of the string, such as
the repetition of k-sequences. LT languages are more interesting. The
corresponding grammars generate variable sequences of symbols–e.g., a
grammar which, given Σ = {a, b}, generates L (where the star symbol
stands for zero or more repetitions and the pipe symbol for OR).5 The
automata that accept such languages–let us call them LT-acceptors
(Fig. 3B)–must be able to perform some kind of Boolean operation on a
possible input. Since they can recognise more than one kind of sequence
and have to discard others (in this case “bb”), they have to keep track
of the last symbols read to check if the next one will satisfy one of
the allowed combinations. Thus, for instance, an acceptor of LT₁ would
have to “remember” whether the symbol is a OR b AND, in the latter case,
whether the next symbol is a and NOT b.

Fig. 3

A graphical representation of: a a scanner; b L (LT₁) acceptor; c L
(LTT₁) acceptor

[]

[]

Despite having a rudimentary form of memory, LT acceptors, like SL
acceptors, are unable to count the number of k-sequences in a string.
They accept if some of the k-sequences are found in the string,
otherwise they reject or halt. This limitation is overcome by LTT
acceptors. LTT languages are languages that have a number of repetitions
of a certain patter. Take, for instance, L , where Σ = {a, b} as before.
L (LTT₁) contains string of arbitrary length including at least three
adjacent ab sequences. Thus, the corresponding LTT acceptors (Fig. 3C)
must be able to quantify portions of the string by recording the number
of occurrences of ab. If ab occurs at least three times, then the LTT
acceptor accepts the string. Otherwise, if ab occurs less than three
times, the LTT acceptor rejects or halts.6

I shall say more about subregular automata when, in the next section, I
suggest how they can be used to model plant behaviour. For now, just
note that while the subregular hierarchy has mainly been used to model
phonological elements of human languages (e.g., Avcu and Hestvik 2020),
its broader relevance to understanding differences between human and
animal cognitive abilities is usually acknowledged (Jäger and Rogers
2012; Fitch and Friederici 2012; more on this in Sect. 5). The
requirements for applying Chomsky’s hierarchy (or, more specifically,
the subregular hierarchy) to real-world systems are mainly two. First,
we need to identify a class of signals that embodies the vocabulary of
the strings that can be read by the system being characterised as an
automaton. Second, we need to identify behavioural responses that
correspond to the outputs of the accepting states of the automaton.

Plants as automata

Regarding the first of the two requirements mentioned at the end of the
previous section, a problem for modelling plant communication in terms
of Chomsky’s hierarchy is the limited experimental evidence available.
Although there is a considerable amount of research on the subject (see
Sect. 2), the details of the communicative interaction are often
unknown. ES’ signalling is a partial exception to this state of affairs.
Studies such as García-Servín et al. (2021) show that it is possible to
identify voltage ranges to which specific plants are sensitive. For
example, Dionaea muscipula and Mimosa pudica, both plants capable of
rapid movement, show responsiveness to a voltage range between 0.25 and
2 V. We can therefore tentatively interpret AP sequences as generated
from a vocabulary Σ = {0, 1}, where 1 corresponds to an AP with a
voltage between 0.25 and 2 V, and 0 to the absence of voltage in this
range.

Regarding the second requirement, the choice of fast-moving plants as a
case study is clearly due to the fact that we can test their responses
in real time. Changes in temperature or light, for instance, cause a
variety of responses in different plants, but most of these responses
are only detectable in the medium to long term (e.g., they stimulate the
release of specific chemicals that affect growth and development, or
crop production). Although this type of response could be interpreted
according to the approach I will propose, it would be difficult to
determine the details of how the plant processes the information (either
because the molecular basis of the responses is unknown or because it is
impossible to detect when the responses happen as they are gradual). On
the other hand, responses to stimulation by VOCs and AVs (Sect. 2) would
provide ideal experimental protocols for the kind of model proposed here
because of their relatively short duration. But again, the evidence
about these processes is still too fragmentary to allow a proper
conceptualisation.

Another reason for choosing Dionaea muscipula and Mimosa pudica, along
with plants of the genera Aldrovanda and Drosera, as model organisms is
that they all display similar mechanisms of ES processing (Volkov et al.
2009; Pavlovic et al. 2017; Krausko et al. 2017). Roughly, this
processing can be described as follows. First, a specific electrical
cue–or sequence of electrical cues–is perceived on the leaves of the
plant. This leads to the opening of water channels (called in Dionaea,
Aldrovanda or Drosera–which are all carnivorous plants–“plasmodesmata”,
and “gap junctions” in Mimosa) between hydraulic reservoirs. The opening
of the water channels is triggered by an increase in cytosolic calcium
concentration. In carnivorous plants, the calcium influx activates
calcium-dependent protein kinases, which phosphorylate various proteins
involved in the opening of plasmodesmata. In Mimosa, the calcium influx
activates a mechanosensitive channel protein that allows the influx of
potassium ions, which in turn triggers the opening of gap junctions. The
opening of the water channels leads to a rapid increase in the flow of
water from the storage cells to the motor cells. This increase in water
pressure within the motor cells is the primary driving force behind the
movement of the trap or leaflets. In Dionaea, the water pressure causes
the hinge cells to swell, forcing the trap to close. In Mimosa, the
water pressure causes the pulvini to shrink, folding the leaflets
together.

While it is important to acknowledge these physiological similarities in
order to strengthen the comparison between the lineages under study, for
the application of the present analysis we can blackbox most of these
details. What is fundamental in the application of Chomsky’s hierarchy
and automata theory to plant behaviour is the sensitivity of the plant
to specific properties of the cue. Thus, assuming that Aldrovanda or
Drosera, like Dionaea or Mimosa, are sensitive to ESs in a certain
voltage range, we can think of a sequence of APs as generated by a
grammar 𝒢 with vocabulary Σ = {0, 1} as above, whose rules can be
discovered by observing how the plant reacts to specific combinations.
If a particular lineage displays responses corresponding to the
acceptance of a particular language at some level of the subregular
hierarchy, while another is apparently insensitive to the characteristic
properties of that language, then we have prima facie reasons to say
that the first lineage is more computationally complex than the second.
Moreover, if we accept the view in formal language theory (Jäger and
Rogers 2012; Fitch and Friederici 2012; Fitch 2014) that differences in
computational complexity reveal different degrees of cognitive
sophistication, then we have prima facie reasons to believe that the
first lineage is more cognitively sophisticated than the second.

With this hypothesis in mind, let us first consider Dionaea, i.e., the
Venus flytrap. As I mentioned in Sect. 2, the Venus flytrap has been
extensively studied in the context of plant communication. In fact,
along with other carnivorous plants, it has attracted the attention of
biologists since Darwin’s time (Darwin 1880) because of its motility and
reactivity. APs can be generated on the surface of Dionaea’s upper leaf
epidermis by a variety of agents, especially touch. In particular, the
plant’s epidermis contains hairs that are sensitive to the presence of
insects or artificial stimuli. These cause the firing of individual
potentials. Böhm et al. (2016) and Hedrich and Neher (2018) have
investigated the details of Dionaea’s response to specific sequences of
APs. One AP does not elicit any response. Two APs are sufficient to
cause the closure of the trap. Three APs induce the production of a
hormone called jasmonic acid, which activates the endocrine system and
prepares the Venus flytrap for digestion. More than five APs amplify the
activity of the flytrap endocrine system, favouring the complete
digestion of the prey (assuming, of course, that the APs are caused by
the presence of an insect rather than being artificially produced).
Figure 4 reconstructs the sequence of APs to which Dionaea is sensitive
in terms of the vocabulary Σ = {0, 1}.

Fig. 4

Dionaea’s sensitivity to specific sequences of APs

[]

[]

The maximum time interval between the first and second AP is 30 s and
the absence of further APs after the second can lead to an anticipated
opening of the lobes (Hedrich and Neher 2018, p. 226). The number of APs
required for trap closure can vary depending on external conditions
(Hedrich and Neher 2018, p. 227) but, despite some variability, the
overall behaviour is robust.

Let us now look at the Venus flytrap as an automaton. To strengthen a
possible comparison with plants such as Mimosa pudica, which is not
carnivorous, I shall focus only on the stimulation/reaction steps (since
Mimosa’s reactions serve a defensive role, it would be unfair to compare
the two behaviours as a whole). The behaviour of the Venus flytrap can
be modelled as a finite automaton as shown in Fig. 5 (I assume here,
following Hendrich and Neher, that the lack of the second AP after 30 s
resets the processing of the cue).

Fig. 5

Dionaea automaton

[]

[]

Symbolically, this automaton is defined by the tuple
 < {q_(o),,,q₁,,,q₂}, {0,1}, δ, q₀, q₂>, where δ is the transition
function defined in Table 1.

Table 1

Dionaea automaton’s transition function

          0       1
  ------- ------- ----
  q_(o)   q_(o)   q₁
  q₁      q₀      q₂
  q₂      q₂      q₂

The language accepted by this automaton is L , which is a simple LTT.
This corroborates Hedrich and Neher’s hypothesis that the Venus flytrap
has some capacity for counting. Using automata theory, this capacity can
be more rigorously characterised as the ability to detect a threshold
value for accepting (i.e., reacting to) a certain sequence of
symbols/cues. No similar ability has been observed so far in Mimosa
pudica, or in plants of the genera Aldrovanda and Drosera.

Mimosa is famous for its characteristic response to touch and vibration.
When its leaflets are stimulated, Mimosa quickly closes them. The
physiological details have been extensively studied, for instance, by
Volkov et al. (2009). Apparently, the plant responds immediately after
the first stimulation and shows no reactivity to further APs.7 It could
be argued that the comparison between Dionaea and Mimosa is unfair
because their reactions to APs serve different purposes. While Dionaea’s
behaviour is related to resource gathering, Mimosa’s response is a
protection against potentially harmful events (such as a herbivore
bite). Note, however, that what is here at stake is not a functional
analysis of the trait. It is certainly possible that certain
environmental challenges favoured the evolution of more sophisticated
responses. Nevertheless, what is being ascertained in the present
context is not whether a behaviour is more or less adapted to a
particular ecology. What is being inquired is the automata behaviour in
similar mechanical circumstances. It may well be that Mimosa exhibits a
more complex behaviour in different circumstances.8 However, in the
particular case of APs processing for rapid responses, it displays a
behaviour that is apparently simpler than Dionaea. In fact, it can be
defined by the tuple  < {q_(o),,,q₁}, {0,1}, ε, q₀, q₁>, where ε is the
transition function defined in Table 2.

Table 2

Mimosa automaton’s transition function

          0       1
  ------- ------- ----
  q_(o)   q_(o)   q₁
  q₁      q₁      q₁

The language accepted by this automaton is L , where the
symbol + denotes at least one occurrence of the symbol. L (D) is an SL
language, since neither quantification nor Boolean operations are
required for the acceptance of a sequence of symbols. We can therefore
conclude that Mimosa is a simple scanner, at least as far as this
specific interaction is concerned.

There is less evidence about APs processing in the genera Aldrovanda or
Drosera. This is the main reason why I focused on M. pudica, despite the
functional differences between this plant and Dionaea. The available
evidence on Aldrovanda vesiculosa (e.g., Iijima and Sibaoka 1981;
Poppinga et al. 2019), an aquatic plant with a trap similar to that of a
Venus flytrap, suggests that it is not capable of counting. The trap
closes as soon as an AP is generated, revealing a simpler behavioural
response to the cue that can be modelled similarly to the response of M.
pudica. The case of Drosera capensis (as well of other plants of the
genus Drosera) is potentially more interesting due to its distinctive
morphological features (Ivesic et al. 2022). This plant has tentacles
covered with an adhesive mucilage that respond to tactile stimulation.
Under natural conditions, the presence of prey causes the tentacles to
encircle and suffocate the prey. Due to the more flexible motility of
the tentacles, D. capensis might appear to be able to display a more
sophisticated behaviour. However, at least according to the analysis
proposed here, the closure of the tentacles does not seem to show more
computational complexity than that of A. vesiculosa. Nevertheless,
Ivesic et al. (2022) provide evidence that the process of digestion
could be sensitive to sequences of APs, similar to the flytrap’s case.

Discussion

The above analysis is in many ways only a first, tentative step towards
the application of automata theory to plant communication and behaviour
(although it should be noted that a somewhat similar approach has
already been proposed in the past by Kawano et al. 2012). The analysis
is dependent on previous experimental protocols that, it goes without
saying, were carried out without this specific application in mind. A
more systematic and interdisciplinary effort should be made to classify
the types of cues and the physiological mechanisms processing them, as
well as to design specific experiments to compare the computational
properties of these mechanisms. Despite its limitations, I believe that
the work developed in the previous sections provides support for the
following two considerations, as well as a motivation for experimenters
to consider automata theory and the Chomsky hierarchy as valuable tools
for future research.

Firstly, as mentioned above, the comparison between Venus flytrap and
other species suggests that there are differences between them in the
way they process artificially induced cues. These phenomena can be
broadly described as communicative, in the sense that the plant’s
behavioural flexibility can be exploited by researchers to elicit a
range of desired responses in specific circumstances (see Sect. 2). In
the context of comparative formal linguistics, behavioural flexibility
is measured comparatively in terms of automata’s complexity. In turn,
automata’s complexity is taken to reflect levels of cognitive
sophistication. However, this inference from automata’s complexity to
cognitive sophistication needs further clarification. Human beings,
chimpanzees or birds, for instance, are able to communicate in certain
ways because they have a brain, at least some capacity for abstract
reasoning (e.g., Bugnyar et al. 2016) and characteristic desires. Thus,
when we infer cognitive sophistication from communicative interactions
in a particular species, we are taking behavioural evidence as an
indication of differences between organisms that we already know to be
cognitive agents, at least according to a largely shared common view
(see, for instance, Lyon 2006; Allen and Trestman 2016; Adams 2017;
Ginsburg and Jablonka 2019; Andrews and Monsó 2021).

In contrast, in the case of plant communication, there is no analogous
consensually accepted evidence that a particular behaviour is due to
cognitive features of the plant. Plants lack a nervous system (although
some authors suggest that phloem and xylem might play an analogous role;
Trewavas 2015; Calvo 2023), and there is no reason to believe they are
able of some form of abstract reasoning or desire (at least not in a
literal sense). Thus, when we talk about the “cognitive sophistication”
of plants, we are somehow stretching the concept of cognition, so as to
include in its characterisation some other features (possibly related to
some more basic capacity for information processing; Thompson 2006).
Concepts such as “cognition” or “communication” have long been subject
to a process of “semantic pressure”, aimed at ridding them of
unjustified anthropocentric, or even zoocentric, biases (Figdor 2018).
According to Figdor, the successful extension of these concepts beyond
their original domain requires a gradual and progressive consilience of
experimental evidence, mathematical modelling and explanatory
frameworks. I would thus argue that the inference from automata’s
complexity to cognitive sophistication might be sound, as in the case of
humans or animals, but only on the assumption that it is possible to
provide additional independent reasons for thinking of plants as
cognitive agents. Alone, automata’s complexity is insufficient to
guarantee cognitive sophistication (otherwise every computer, or even a
calculator, would be a cognitive agent).

Whether there are strong independent reasons to believe that plants are
cognitive agents is not for me to decide in this article. However, it is
important to note that, as argued by Colaço (2022; see also Akagi 2018),
even if we ultimately reject the hypothesis that plants are cognitive
agents, it may still be useful to model them as if they were cognitive
agents (and the same point could be extended to computers, such as deep
learning systems; see, for instance, Otsuka 2023, pp. 139–140). This is
because, by stretching the most established conceptions of cognition
through the analysis of borderline cases, we can learn more about
cognition itself. In the present case, by analysing communication in
animals and plants as analogous phenomena through the lens of automata
theory, we can hope to elucidate similarities and differences in the
mechanisms employed to generate specific responses. Whether we
ultimately decide to label these mechanisms as cognitive in both animals
and plants, or only in animals, we will have gained some insight into
cognition.

Given these coordinates, if the supporters of plant cognition are right,
and plant behaviour is the result of mechanisms that can be labelled as
cognitive, then automata’s complexity can reveal different degrees of
cognitive sophistication in plants. While this puts the burden of proof
on the supporters of plant’s cognition (because they must provide
independent reasons for the truth of the antecedent of the conditional),
it also gives them some grounds for optimism. If different lineages
display different levels of computational complexity– as in the case of
Venus compared to Mimosa, Aldrovanda and Drosera in our case study–then
it is natural to wonder about the causes of these different behaviours.
While there is no guarantee that Venus’ ability to count is the result
of cognitive processes, the fact that Venus displays such an ability (as
evidenced by the fact that we need an LTT acceptor to model its
behaviour) at least encourages a cognitive explanation of its behaviour.
This is because counting (albeit to the limited extent allowed by an LTT
grammar; see Sect. 3) usually involves the presence of some–at least
rudimentary–memory, which in turn is considered an important criterion
for cognition (e.g., Adams 2017; Ginsburg and Jablonka 2019). On the
other hand, if we ultimately reject the hypothesis that plants are
cognitive agents on independent grounds, this evidence should stimulate
further research into how it is possible for an organism without
cognitive capacities is able to function as an automaton at a particular
level of Chomsky’s hierarchy.

Focusing on the identification of abilities related to a particular
level of Chomsky’s (or, more precisely, subregular) hierarchy–such as
the ability to perform Boolean operations and basic counting–is, I
believe, a promising perspective for the field of plant cognition. What
is perhaps less promising is the fact that even the supposedly most
sophisticated of the plants considered above–i.e., Venus flytrap (or,
possibly, D. capensis, if Ivesic et al. 2022’s findings are
corroborated)–does not seem to score very well from the point of view of
Chomsky’s hierarchy. Although they can perform Boolean operations and
basic counting, LTT acceptors such as Venus flytrap in our present case
study are unable to perform other simple operations, such as those
requiring comparisons involving the order of elements (Jäger and Rogers
2012, p. 1965). This ability, displayed by automata above the LTT level,
can arguably be related to a primitive capacity for prediction, since an
automaton capable of recognising ordered patterns can be cognitively
characterised as expecting certain sequences of signals, while rejecting
those that do not match the expected patterns.9 The fact that none of
the specimens analysed in Sect. 4 show behaviour above the LTT level
could be taken as evidence that these behaviours do not involve
capacities of prediction, contrary to what some advocates of plant
cognition might believe.

Remember from the introduction that the main aim of this article was to
compare plant cognition with that of humans and animals. If we rely on
the proposed comparative measure, then we can say that the ability of
plants to respond to induced stimuli is quite limited. This is perhaps
not surprising, but it suggests that a more cautious approach to plant
cognition should be adopted. Of course, new evidence could overturn this
tentative conclusion. For example, if we were able to identify plant’s
reactions to APs with voltages in different ranges (rather than in a
single definite range, as in the cases analysed above), we could
interpret them as sensitive to a more complex vocabulary (because each
range could be digitalised as a different symbol). The experimenters
could thus produce more complex sequences of activations in order to
elicit more sophisticated responses, perhaps displaying a behaviour
corresponding to more complex automata in the hierarchy of automata.
Moreover, research on other types of stimuli, displaying more
variation–such as AVs–or combinatorial properties–such as VOCs–might
help to broaden our view on the communicative abilities of plants and,
possibly, about their cognitive sophistication.

Conclusion

In this article I proposed a possible application of Chomsky’s hierarchy
and automata theory to model plant behaviour. In doing so, I have
focused on what is called “plant communication”, which includes both
plant-plant communicative interactions and artificial stimulation aimed
at eliciting specific responses. For reasons of simplicity and the lack
of more experimental evidence, I have focused mainly on the latter.
After discussing the link between Chomsky’s hierarchy, automata theory
and cognitive sophistication from the perspective of comparative formal
linguistics in Sect. 3, I have analysed automata’s complexity of some
plant behaviours in different lineages in Sect. 4. These lineages–i.e.,
Dionaea muscipula, Mimosa pudica and plants belonging to the genera
Aldrovanda and Drosera–exhibit rapid movements in response to electrical
stimulation. From the application of automata theory to behaviours
resulting from similar physiological mechanisms, it can be extrapolated
that Dionaea muscipula has a certain capacity to perform Boolean
operations (related to the discrimination of specific sequences of
symbols) and counting. This result, although tentative, suggests two
things. Firstly, it shows that different lineages, under similar
mechanical conditions of activation, can react in more or less complex
ways. This may lead to the speculation that they have different degrees
of cognitive capacities. Although the tenability of this conclusion
depends heavily on the definition of cognition used, it encourages
further comparative studies. Secondly, the case studies analysed also
show the limits of the communicative behaviours of plants. In
particular, if we accept Jäger and Rogers’ (2012) cognitive
characterisation of automata accepting subregular languages, none of the
discussed lineages is apparently able to recognise order relations in
sequences of activation. This might suggest a limited capacity of
prediction.

The proposed analysis is admittedly only a first attempt to bring formal
tools to the field of plant cognition. While further experimental
protocols explicitly designed to test the assumptions involved in the
application of automata theory would help to make this methodology more
rigorous, the present work has argued that these applications can
provide useful insights into the cognitive abilities of plants.

Acknowledgements

I thank the Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (FCT Contract Nº
DL57/2016/CP1479/CT0064) and EVORISE–Exploring The Evolutionary Origin
Of Sentience (FCT Project PeX.2022.05256.PTDC, 10.54499/2022.05256.PTDC)
for the financial support. I am grateful to Davide Vecchi for comments
on the manuscript.

Author contributions

I drafted and elaborated the entire article.

Funding

Open access funding provided by FCT|FCCN (b-on).

Data availability

This paper utilizes data and findings from published research articles.
All relevant sources are fully cited within the text and listed in the
References section. Due to the philosophical nature of the inquiry, no
original data collection was conducted for this paper.

Declarations

Conflict of interest

The author has no conflict of interest to declare. There is no financial
interest to report. I certify that the submission is original work and
is not under review at any other publication.

Footnotes

1

Of course, this does not mean that selection does not play a role in
eavesdropping. Acoustic sensitivity to insect chewing (Appel and Cocroft
2014), photoreception of shading (Novoplansky et al. 1990) or touch
sensitivity (Pavlovic et al. 2017) are all arguably adaptive behaviours
in which unintentional cues are exploited to increase survival chances.

2

The mathematical proof that a given language cannot be generated from a
given grammar is usually based on what is called the “pumping lemma” for
that particular grammar. Since these technical details are not relevant
here, the interested reader can consult Hopcroft et al. (2008) or Sipser
(2020) for rigorous discussions of the pumping lemma for regular and
context-free grammars.

3

The name “dendrophilia” comes from ancient Greek δένδρον
(“tree”) + φίλια (“love”). Fitch’s hypothesis is so called because
context-free embeddings are often represented by tree-like graphs. Thus,
“dendrophilia” refers to our particular affinity for context-free
linguistic structure, which, according to Fitch, is absent in other
animals (or, more generally, living beings).

4

This is the case, for instance, when we input strings of the language L
(𝒢₁) = {(a,b)^(n) • (c,d)^(n)|n ∈ ℕ⁺} into a finite automaton designed
to accept the regular language L (𝒢₃) = {(a,b)³ • (c,d)³}. The automaton
will accidentally accept strings of the form , although it is not
designed to do so. This is again a consequence of the pumping lemma
mentioned in footnote 2.

5

To express regular languages, instead of using the context-free grammar
formalism employed at the beginning of this session, it is more
practical to use the regular expressions formalism here adopted.

6

Note that the L (LTT₁) acceptor does not process, if not incidentally,
strings containing exactly three ab sequences. This is because, after
scanning the third ab sequence, it enters an accepting state that is
insensitive to any further input. However, other LTT acceptors could be
designed to accept sequences containing a block of fixed length.

7

For a nice illustration of the different sensitivities of Dionaea and
Mimosa see neuroscientist Greg Gage’s TED talk (available at
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pvBlSFVmoaw).

8

Gagliano et al. (2014) refer to an experiment in which Mimosa is exposed
to repeated falls, to which it initially reacts as expected (by closing
the leaflets). However, Gagliano and her collaborators claim that, after
a certain number of falls, the plant is able to habituate to the
stimulus and recognise that it does not pose a danger, thus keeping the
leaflets open after a fall. Furthermore, Gagliano et al. argue that the
plant is able to remember what it has learned about the stimulus up to a
month after the initial habituation. As far as I know, no researcher has
yet been able to replicate Gagliano et al.’s experiment. In any case,
there are two things to note. Firstly, if the experiment were to be
replicated with the same result, it would certainly be interesting to
further study the biochemical mechanisms responsible for the behaviour
and to interpret them through the lens of automata theory in order to
explore Mimosa’s cognitive sophistication in more detail. This means
that the correctness of Gagliano et al.’s results would not invalidate
the approach proposed here. Secondly, even if Mimosa is capable of more
sophisticated cognitive abilities than those discussed in the text, this
is not incompatible with the fact that, in the specific circumstances
being analysed, its behaviour is simpler than that of the flytrap.

9

An example of such an automaton is the automaton which, given Σ = {0,
1}, accepts a language L , according to which a sequence of two zeros
must precede a sequence of two ones before any other symbol occurs.

Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

References

Associated Data

Data Availability Statement

This paper utilizes data and findings from published research articles.
All relevant sources are fully cited within the text and listed in the
References section. Due to the philosophical nature of the inquiry, no
original data collection was conducted for this paper.
