Collection date 2026.

Introduction

Plant-insect communication has been shown to rely on various modalities,
including vision, olfaction, and mechanoreception (Boppré, 1978; Kevan
and Lane, 1985; Gori, 1989; Ne’eman and Nesher, 1995; Schiestl, 2010;
Brito et al., 2015; van Dam and Bouwmeester, 2016). Plant-insect
(airborne) acoustic communication, however, has never been demonstrated.
It has long been known that plants vibrate at ultrasonic frequencies due
to physiological processes such as cavitation, resulting from changes in
their water pressure (Milburn and Johnson, 1966; Tyree and Dixon, 1983;
Ponomarenko et al., 2014). Recently, it has also been shown that these
ultrasonic sounds produced by a drought-stressed or cut plant are
airborne and are probably loud enough to be detected by
ultrasound-hearing moths from a distance of a few meters (Khait et al.,
2023). Moreover, it was shown that these sounds can serve as reliable
cues for the condition of the plant, specifically indicating whether a
plant is drought-stressed.

Ultrasonic hearing abilities and hearing organs located on different
body parts have evolved multiple times independently in several
Lepidoptera families. Hearing sensitivity typically falls within the
20–60 kHz range in all groups of moths that have evolved ultrasonic
hearing (Fenton and Fullard, 1979; Hoy, 1996; Conner, 1999; Robert and
Göpfert, 2002; Moir et al., 2013; Göpfert and Hennig, 2016). Two main
hypotheses exist regarding the evolution of these hearing organs. The
first suggests that they have evolved for sexual communication, i.e., to
detect ultrasonic signals produced by male moths (Nakano et al., 2009).
The second hypothesis suggests that they have evolved as an antipredator
mechanism to detect echolocation calls produced by bats (Conner, 1999;
Greenfield and Weber, 2000; Nakano et al., 2015, but see Kawahara et
al., 2019). Regardless of why it has evolved, ultrasonic hearing allows
moths to detect various additional sounds (Spangler, 1988), including
plant dehydration sound clicks which have a wide spectrum that overlaps
with moths’ hearing range and peaks around 50 kHz (Khait et al., 2023).
We thus hypothesized that herbivore female moths with ultrasonic hearing
might exploit ultrasonic plant emissions as cues to infer plant
condition and employ this information for oviposition.

The selection of an oviposition site has a significant impact on the
fitness of the hatching herbivore larvae and is thus one of the most
critical decisions in the life of a female moth (Lhomme et al., 2018).
In this study, we examined the Egyptian cotton leafworm (Spodoptera
littoralis; Noctuidae) – a polyphagous herbivore and one of the most
significant pests of tomato plants (Prasad and Bhattacharya, 1975),
which possesses tympanic ears tuned to ultrasonic frequencies (Tougaard,
1996; Skals et al., 2005; Anton et al., 2011). The ears’ sensitivity of
many moths from the Noctuidae family has been fully characterized, and
they typically show a wide range of sensitivity between ~20 and ~60 kHz
(Fullard, 1998). The full audiogram of the Egyptian cotton leafworm moth
has not been documented, but (in accordance with the moths in the
Noctuidae family) its hearing has been shown to be most sensitive around
38 kHz, a frequency which is part of the plant’s click spectrum
(Tougaard, 1998). Moreover, the spectra of the clicks of the males of
this species (Figure 1), which are clearly heard by the females, broadly
overlap with plant clicks. We further demonstrated that the moth can
hear echolocation calls which are in the range between 40 and 80 kHz,
thus demonstrating sensitivity in the plant clicking range (see
Methods).

Figure 1.

The setup and results.

In all panels A–D, the sound played in the setup is presented in the
left section (treatment). Because the number of egg clusters was low
(between 0 and 5 clusters), we find that presenting the Bayesian
posterior (see Methods) for the probability to lay a cluster is more
informative (we present the raw data on Figure 1—figure supplement 2).
The posterior distribution is depicted by solid lines. The prior
distribution (with a mean of 0.5 and a standard deviation of 0.1) is
represented by dashed lines. To create these plots, eggs laid on the
tested side (where the speaker was active or hydrated plant in the
initial experiment) are denoted as 1, while those on the opposite side
are marked as 0. These plots thus demonstrate the probability of
obtaining a 1 or 0 in each experiment. The middle section shows the
two-choice oviposition setup, and the right side shows the results for
the following conditions: (A) Drought-stressed vs. thriving plant (no
playback). (B1) Silence vs. drought-stressed plant playback (without a
plant). (B2) Deaf females in a setup with silence vs. drought-stressed
plant playback (without a plant). (B3) Silent plant vs. playback of
drought-stressed plant. (C) A box with male moths vs. an empty box.
Tomato and male clicks are presented (time signal and spectrum) in
panels B and C. The horizontal black bar depicts 0.1 ms.

[]

[]

Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Male Egyptian cotton leaf moths (S.
littoralis) courtship sequences recorded when we placed males in the
arena (spectrogram
presented).c322/12768406/858d5c56d33d/elife-104700-fig1-figsupp1.jpg?>c322/12768406/769970532029/elife-104700-fig1-figsupp1.gif?>

Figure 1—figure supplement 2.Raw scatter plot data supporting Figure 1
(two-choice experiments).This figure replicates the experiment shown in
Figure 1, displaying the raw measurements without Bayesian analysis. In
all panels (A–D), the treatment is shown in the left section. These
graphs summarize every datum collected throughout the two-choice
experiments. Each marker represents a cluster deposited at the choice
indicated on the X-axis. The overall mean is overlaid as a solid black
line, and the median as a solid red line. (A) Drought-stressed vs.
thriving plant (no playback). (B1) Silence vs. drought-stressed plant
playback (without a plant). (B2) Deaf females in a setup with silence
vs. drought-stressed plant playback (without a plant). (B3) Silent plant
vs. playback of drought-stressed plant. (C) A box with male moths vs. an
empty
box.c322/12768406/e93a648cebd3/elife-104700-fig1-figsupp2.jpg?>c322/12768406/59df47de918f/elife-104700-fig1-figsupp2.gif?>

Much research has been conducted to characterize the females’
oviposition choice in this species with many factors suggested to be
important for their decision-making process. The females have been found
to prefer certain species of host plants over others (Salama et al.,
1971; Sadek et al., 2010), to select plants based on their larval
experience (Proffit et al., 2015) and to choose plants devoid of
parasitic larvae, possibly because the presence of such larvae could
promote the recruitment of natural enemies (Sadek et al., 2010). Studies
have also investigated female preferences in response to plant stress
signals, particularly olfactory cues. However, there is no clear
consensus on the direction of these preferences (e.g. Chen et al., 2008;
Showler and Moran, 2003). Nonetheless, it is widely accepted that
females are capable of recognizing and responding to these signals.

In this study, we investigated whether ultrasonic sounds typical of
drought-stressed plants influence oviposition decision-making in the
Egyptian cotton leafworm moths. Based on their general behavioral
preference for non-dry plants (as we validated, see below), we
hypothesized that the female moths would be affected by plant ultrasonic
signals when making oviposition decisions. Our results support this
hypothesis, providing the first evidence for the use of typical plant
sounds by insects.

Results

In each of the following experiments, we placed 10.9±0.17 (mean ± SE)
fertile female S. littoralis moths in the center of a 100×50×50 cm³
arena divided in the middle, with two choices offered, one on either
side of the arena (a two-alternative forced choice paradigm, see
Methods). To assess their choice, we compared the number of egg clusters
which the moths had laid on each side.

Each treatment was repeated at least nine times (i.e. with a new set of
moths), but the moths in each repetition were observed for several
consecutive nights so that the minimum number of egg-laying events per
treatment was 17. Each night was considered an independent observation
because the moth could make a new decision regarding where to lay her
eggs (to account for this repetition, the nights were nested in the
statistical model). The treatment and the control sides were alternated
between repetitions. To ensure replicability, the main plant-acoustic
treatments were run twice with a pause of several months in between (see
Table 1 in the Methods). In these experiments, we used the number of egg
clusters, rather than the total number of eggs, as the response variable
because each cluster represents a distinct oviposition decision.
However, we describe a third experiment below where we evaluated the
effect of the plant sounds on egg number (and not cluster number).

Table 1.

Summary of experimental conditions, including the number of repetitions, i.e., the number of times that new moths were placed in the arenas and the number of observations (each repetition was observed for approximately three consecutive nights).

The total number of egg clusters and the p-values for each experiment
are reported. Experiments that were replicated twice appear in two
separate lines denoted for combined statistics and by #1 or #2.
Experiments and observations that did not produce any egg-laying were
excluded from the dataset, and that is why the number of observations is
often the same as the number of repetitions.

  Experiment                                                                                                 #Repetitions   #Observations   #Egg clusters   Mean ± SE clusters on the side of the treatment   Mean ± SE clusters on the side of the control   p-Value   Estimates (# of egg clusters)
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- --------------- --------------- ------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------- --------- -------------------------------
  Drought-stressed plants vs. well-hydrated plants                                                           17             17              53              0.88±1.11                                         2.23±2.68                                       0.01      0.93
  Playback of a drought-stressed plant vs. silence, combined trials (playback: 60 per minute)                38             45              67              1.08±0.82                                         0.40±0.65                                       0.00      1.00
  Playback of a drought-stressed plant vs. silence #1 (playback: 60 per minute)                              11             17              24              1.11±0.69                                         0.29±0.58                                       0.01      1.34
  Playback of a drought-stressed plant vs. silence #2 (playback: 60 per minute)                              27             28              43              1.07±0.89                                         0.46±0.69                                       0.02      0.84
  Deafened moths –Playback of a drought-stressed plant vs. silence                                           23             23              39              0.70±0.70                                         1.00±1.09                                       0.55      0.12
  Well-hydrated plants and playback of a drought-stressed plant, combined trials (playback: 60 per minute)   29             39              110             1.05±0.99                                         1.76±1.64                                       0.01      –0.52
  Well-hydrated plants and playback of a drought-stressed plant #1 (playback: 60 per minute)                 9              19              44              0.78±0.91                                         1.52±1.38                                       0.05      –0.66
  Well-hydrated plants and playback of a drought-stressed plant #2 (playback: 60 per minute)                 20             20              66              1.30±1.03                                         2.00±1.86                                       0.10      –0.43
  Males vs. no-males                                                                                         19             29              48              0.72±0.92                                         0.93±1.33                                       0.39      –0.25

First, to examine whether S. littoralis females prefer to lay their eggs
on drying or fresh tomato plants (without any playback sound, see
Experiment 1 in the Methods), we placed them in an arena with one drying
and one fresh plant. Female S. littoralis demonstrated a strong
preference to lay their eggs on fresh plants that were not
drought-stressed (Figure 1A, 2.2±2.7 vs. 0.9±1.1 egg clusters; mean ±
SE; clusters per night respectively, p=0.004, mixed effect generalized
linear models (GLMM) with the number of egg clusters as the explained
parameter, the treatment as a fixed effect and the number of the arena
and the repetition round and night as random effects, see Statistics).

We next examined whether an ultrasonic acoustic stimulus affects moths’
oviposition decision-making. To this end, we played drought-stressed
sounds (recorded from a real drying tomato plant) on one side of the
arena and either placed nothing on the other side or placed a decoy
silent resistor to control for electric field sensing (see Experiment 2
in the Methods). Because we aimed to examine the effect of sound only
(without other sensory cues such as visual or olfactory), in this
condition, there was no plant in the arena, and we placed a small mesh
box wrapped with a paper towel in the center of each side to encourage
oviposition (the speaker was under the mesh so that the moth could not
sense the vibration directly, only through airborne sound waves). Female
moths significantly preferred to lay their eggs on the side of the arena
in which drying plant sounds were played (contradicting the initial
observation that they prefer hydrated plants; Figure 1A vs. 1B1).

To make sure that the acoustic signals were the sole influential factor
in the moths’ decision-making process, we deafened mated female moths
(by puncturing the tympanic membrane located at the thoracoabdominal
juncture using an entomological needle #2, see Methods section) and
repeated the experiment (drought-stressed sounds – no plant in the
arena). We placed 9.3±1.8 female moths in an arena and monitored their
choice of oviposition sites. In accordance with the acoustic hypothesis,
the deafened moths did not show any preference in egg-laying (Figure
1B2, 0.70±0.70 vs. 1.0±1.09 egg clusters per night, p=0.55, estimate =
0.12, GLMM).

Notably, this experiment was repeated twice – 6 months apart – and the
preference was significant both times (Figure 1B1, 1.1±0.8 vs. 0.4±0.7
egg clusters per night for the playback and the silent side,
respectively, mean ± SE, p=0.0004, estimate = 1, GLMM as above, see
Table 1 for the results of each session). The average number of egg
clusters (1.1 clusters per night) in this condition was lower than in
the baseline condition with a plant (2.2 clusters), but this is
reasonable when taking into account that there was no plant in the
arena. The playback rate was high with 60 drought clicks played per
minute. This is higher than the rate reported for a single young plant,
but it is feasible when considering a patch of adult plants as we have
demonstrated experimentally (see Methods). Moreover, we repeated this
experiment in an improved experimental setup with a lower playback rate
of 30 per minute and got the same result – see below.

To examine the importance of sound in oviposition decision-making under
pseudo-natural conditions, we placed two hydrated tomato plants – one on
either side of the arena – and added a speaker playing back drought
emissions sounds on one side and a resistor on the other (with the same
impedance as the speaker) to control for potential effects of the
electric field, or nothing. Interestingly, females showed a significant
preference for the silent plant. In this case, the female preference was
similar to the initial experiment (without playback) in which the
females preferred hydrated plants. The females laid 1.8±1.6 vs. 1.1±1.0
egg clusters per night on the silent and playback sides, respectively.
This treatment was also repeated twice over a 12-month period (Figure
1B3, estimate = –0.52, p=0.01, GLMM as above, see Table 1 for the
results of each repetition, note that the second repeat was only
marginally significant).

To assess whether the moths’ response was specific to plant sounds, we
conducted an additional test using male moths that were placed on one
side of the arena (in a mesh box so females could not interact with).
The male moths produced courtship clicks with a similar spectral range
to tomato clicks (as we validated, Methods). Females showed no
significant preference to lay their eggs near male moths (see Figure
1—figure supplement 1, Figure 1C, p=0.4, estimate = –0.25, GLMM as
above).

To gain further insight into the moths’ decision-making process, we
repeated Experiment 2 (Figure 1B) where drought-stressed sounds were
played on one side of the arena without a plant in three additional
repetitions (with a total of N=13 females) while videoing and tracking
the entire behavior. In these repetitions, eggs were laid only on the
playback side of the arena. The continuous tracking showed that most
moths (8 of the 13) visited both sides of the arena, crossing sides
4.2±5.7 times (mean ± SD) on average during the night (Figure 2A).
Moreover, over time, there was a significant increase in the female
moths’ tendency to spend more time in the playback side (logistic GLMM,
p<0.004, Figure 2B).

Figure 2.

Females’ movement and decision-making.

(A) The continuous location over time in the arena (top view) of four
individual moths during one trial of the drought sounds vs. silent
treatment. Time is represented by color in minutes, with a red triangle
indicating the playback side and red X’s marking the locations where
eggs were laid. Note that we cannot be sure which of the individuals
laid the eggs. (B) The proportion of time moths spent in the playback
side (in bins of 30 min) increased over time.

[]

[]

The sound gradient experiment: To control for a few of the experimental
parameters from the setup shown in Figure 1, we conducted another
experiment testing the main effect of plant sounds on oviposition. This
experiment replicated the oviposition site preference between the plant
stress sound side and the quiet side, but within a different
experimental setup (see Sound gradient experiment in the Methods).
Namely, in this experiment, we tested a single moth each time, with a
lower biologically feasible plant click rate (30 clicks per minute, for
experiment regarding natural click rate, see Methods) within a long
arena – creating a sound gradient. To this end, we placed a single
female moth in a 150-cm-long arena. On one side of the arena (location
–75, Figure 3A), a speaker played sounds recorded from a
drought-stressed tomato plant at a rate of 30 clicks per minute. On the
other side of the arena (location +75, Figure 3A), there was a silent
resistor. A feeder with 60% sugar solution was positioned at the center
(location 0, Figure 3A). For each egg cluster, we then measured the
distance from the center where it was laid and the number of eggs it
contained. The results, for both egg and cluster numbers, revealed a
clear bimodal distribution with peaks near the feeder and the speaker
but not at the silent edge of the arena. Hence, most clusters were laid
very close to the feeder or the speaker, while no eggs were laid near
the resistor (the closest egg was 21 cm away, Figure 3B, both egg and
cluster number distributions were significantly different from the
expected H0 distribution which was estimated using permutation,
Kolmogorov-Smirnov [K-S] test, p=2.2 × 10^(–16) for the clusters, p=3.9
× 10^(–14) for the eggs, and see Methods and Figure 3—figure supplement
2). To exclude any potential effect of temporal correlations on
egg-laying, we have also rerun the statistics when only taking the first
night, when the females laid clusters to avoid the desensitization or
dependency. This test revealed similar results (D=0.55, p=2.2 ×
10^(–16)). This was thus a third independent validation that females
prefer to lay eggs near plant playback and that this behavior is seen
both when quantifying the individual egg or the cluster level.

Figure 3.

Females lay eggs near acoustic playback.

(A) The long arena creates an acoustic gradient, allowing us to
investigate whether female moths prefer to lay their eggs in specific
locations based on the sound environment. Additionally, there is sugar
water in the center of the arena, which serves as the adult moth’s food.
(B) Egg count density (solid line) and cluster density (dashed line).
Both figures display a bimodal distribution, with one peak near the
speaker (–75) and another near the feeder (0). The points under the
graph depict laid clusters, illustrating the relationship between the
number of eggs per cluster and their spatial distribution within the
arena.

[]

[]

Figure 3—figure supplement 1.On the left, comparison between the egg
count results (solid line) in the elongated arena and the pseudorandom
distribution (dashed line) (Kolmogorov-Smirnov [K-S] test, D=0.3, p=2.2
× 10^(–16)).On the right, comparison between the cluster count results
(solid line) pseudorandom distribution (dashed line) (K-S test, D=0.21,
p=3.9 × 10^(–14)). The speaker was placed on location –75, a feeder was
placed on the center (location 0), and a resistor was placed on location
75. To exclude any potential effect of temporal correlations on
egg-laying, we have also rerun the statistics when only taking the first
night, when the females laid clusters to avoid the desensitization or
dependency. This test revealed similar results (D=0.55, p-value<2.2 ×
10^(–16)).c322/12768406/113eb076346b/elife-104700-fig3-figsupp1.jpg?>c322/12768406/bf58179be406/elife-104700-fig3-figsupp1.gif?>

Figure 3—figure supplement 2.Sound gradient two-choice test:
Drought-stressed playback+ plant vs. quiet control.(A) We conducted an
additional experiment using the same protocol described for the ‘sound
gradient experiment’ (see Methods, Sound gradient experiment), except
that we placed a dehydrated plant (subjected to the stress treatment
detailed in Experiment 1) on the speaker side and a resistor plus soil
on the control side. (B) The resulting oviposition pattern closely
mirrored those of our earlier studies: When presented with a stressed
plant vs. an empty control, S. littoralis females deposited
significantly more egg clusters on the dehydrated clicking plant. To
test the effect of the treatments on the oviposition, we compared the
observed cluster locations (solid line) to pseudorandom distribution
(dashed line). We found significant differences between the two
distributions (Kolmogorov-Smirnov [K-S] test, D=0.29, p=0.001). The
speaker was placed at location –75 cm, a feeder was placed on the center
(location 0), and a resistor was placed at location 75 cm. We have also
rerun the statistics when only taking the first night when the females
laid clusters to avoid the fear of dependency. These tests revealed
similar results (D=0.34, p=0.020). Light-gray bars denote the observed
measurements aggregated into 10 cm bins
(N=20).c322/12768406/e60e0a3c281d/elife-104700-fig3-figsupp2.jpg?>c322/12768406/ec292c76b3e6/elife-104700-fig3-figsupp2.gif?>

As noted, moths prefer to oviposit near stress sounds in a plant-free
system (Figure 1B1), but their response reverses when stress sounds are
played in a system containing plants, leading them to choose oviposition
sites near the quiet plant (Figure 1B3). In this experimental system, we
aimed to test whether this reversal reflects a general preference for
plants (even when stressed) over no-plant options. We offered moths a
dehydrating plant with added clicking sounds on one edge of the arena
and plain soil on the other (Figure 3—figure supplement 2). Moths
significantly preferred to lay their eggs on the dehydrating clicking
plant compared to plain soil (Figure 3—figure supplement 2). This
experiment conceptually simulates one step prior to Figure 1B1 –
removing the stressed plant while retaining only acoustic signals –
suggesting that clicking sounds might be perceived as indicative of
plant presence in the absence of multimodal signals.

Discussion

We reveal first evidence for the use of acoustic information and
specifically of sounds typically emitted by plants in insect
decision-making. Despite decades of research on plant vibrations, it has
only recently been shown that these vibrations can be detected remotely
by organisms with ultrasonic hearing ability (Khait et al., 2023). Our
current results suggest that S. littoralis females detect and respond to
ultrasonic clicks which are typically emitted by drought-stressed tomato
plants and adjust their choice of oviposition accordingly. This finding
opens a whole new range of possibilities for animal-plant acoustic
interactions.

Moreover, the presence of clicking male moths had no significant effect
on the females’ oviposition preference, suggesting that female moths can
distinguish between different sounds and specifically respond to
plant-like sounds. Although the moth’s hearing system might be too
simple to distinguish among the spectral properties of the different
sounds, i.e., male clicks vs. plant sounds (Nakano et al., 2013), the
temporal patterns of the sequences emitted from these sources are very
different. While male moths emit bursts of several clicks (Figure
1—figure supplement 1), plants emit sporadic clicks with no clear
temporal order (as used in our playback). Playback of additional sound
signals is needed to examine moth specificity.

Although females responded in both treatments when ultrasonic
drought-stressed signals were played, they exhibited opposite
preferences depending on the presence of a plant. When there was no
plant in the arena, the moths showed a strong preference to the playback
side, while when plants were present in the arena, the moths switched
preference to lay their eggs on the silent side. This latter choice was
in accordance with their preference to lay eggs on thriving vs. dry
plants, while the first choice (without a plant) was somewhat
surprising.

One explanation for this reversal in preference might be the multimodal
moth decision-making process. When drought-stressed signals alone
(without a plant) were presented to the female moths, they might have
become the only reliable signals for the presence of a plant in the
arena, which can explain their strong preference for this side
(Ramaswamy, 1988; Sadek, 2011; Zhang et al., 2024). In contrast, when we
integrated thriving plants into the arena, the moths’ decision-making
became multifactorial. Namely, on both sides of the arena, there were
visual, texture, and olfactory cues of thriving plants, while the
treatment side also exhibited an acoustic signal of a stressed plant. In
this setup, the females’ oviposition preference was reversed to the side
without the acoustic signal. This might suggest that the acoustic signal
interpretation is content-dependent, i.e., that the playback of stress
sounds in a multifactorial setup became a reliable signal of the
physiological state of the plant. Therefore, the females reverted back
to their original preference to oviposition on thriving plants.

To further examine this hypothesis, we conducted an additional
experiment using the same protocol described for the ‘Sound gradient
experiment’ (see Methods), except that we placed a dehydrated plant
(subjected to the stress treatment detailed in Experiment 1) on the side
of the speaker that was playing plant sounds. The resulting oviposition
pattern closely mirrored those of our earlier studies: when presented
with a stressed plant supposedly emitting dehydration sounds, S.
littoralis females preferred to deposit their eggs on a dehydrated
clicking plant rather than on a no-plant control (Figure 3—figure
supplement 2). These findings imply that a stressed, clicking plant is
more attractive for oviposition than an empty substrate, suggesting that
clicking might be a cue for the presence of a plant.

Supporting this hypothesis, in the two-choice experiments, the
probability of laying eggs at all was significantly higher when a plant
was present than in the absence of a plant. Specifically, eggs were laid
on 68% vs. 54% of the nights with and without plants, respectively
(p=0.009; binomial test comparing Experiments 2 and 3). The number of
egg clusters was also higher when a plant was present (see Figure 1). We
conclude that the moths were more reluctant to lay their eggs when no
plant was present.

The preference for the silent plant vs. a plant with stress acoustic
playback was not as clear as the preference for the thriving hydrated
plants (compare Figure 1B1 and B3). There are several potential
explanations for this difference. First, moths probably rely on various
cues, including olfaction, to detect a drying plant (Ramaswamy, 1988;
Sadek, 2011; Zhang et al., 2024). Although the playback allowed us to
isolate the specific effect of the acoustic cue, and we tried to select
equal plants, we could not control for other cues provided by the plant,
and we may have provided the animal with a partial (and likely even
contradictory) set of cues. For instance, the plants might have secreted
drought-related volatiles and (although watered) might have occasionally
emitted sounds spontaneously, reducing the effect of our playback.
Indeed, a physiological measurement of plant volatiles suggested that
drying plants can be (at least partially) distinguished by the moths.

We further investigated the behavioral mechanism of the female moths as
they explored the arena. We quantified the moths’ movement during the
decision process in the experimental setup with drought-stressed
acoustic signals played on one side and with an equal-impedance resistor
on the other side. Our findings indicated that their decision process
typically included crossing over between the two sides of the arena and
spending an increasing amount of time on the (drought-stressed) playback
side. This suggests that females explore the available space and
ultimately decide based on comparing the two.

Various plant species emit airborne ultrasonic clicks when they are
drought-stressed, which can serve as reliable cues for the physiological
condition of the plant (Khait et al., 2023). Our findings demonstrate
that moths with auditory abilities use these clicks when choosing a site
for oviposition. We hypothesize that some other species of insects might
also exploit these acoustic cues to their advantage in different
contexts. Pollinating insects, for example, might use drought-related
sounds when choosing where to forage. Some insects might even be able to
distinguish between clicks produced by different plants or under
different conditions, such as drying plants vs. plants under a pathogen
attack.

Plant clicks are ultrasonic and thus very different from most other
outdoors sounds (such as wind sounds, as we also show in Khait et al.,
2023). Moreover, because the clicks are ultrasonic and not very intense,
they can only be picked up by the moths from a short distance (~1.5 m),
which allows the moths to localize them in space.

The sounds emitted by drought-stressed plants are probably a cue rather
than a signal, i.e., they did not evolve to convey information to
insects. The interaction that we have demonstrated in this study
therefore cannot be considered ‘communication’ according to the
conservative definition of the term, which relies on signals that have
evolved to convey a specific message (Searcy and Nowicki, 2005; Skyrms,
2010). However, it is possible that some plants have evolved an ability
to amplify their emissions or modify their spectral content to
facilitate desirable interactions with animals and perhaps even with
other plants (Veits et al., 2019). One exciting possibility would be
that plants signal an insect attack by amplifying click intensity to
recruit potential predators of the attacking insects, such as predatory
insects, rodents, or bats. Such amplification could be achieved by
various morphological modifications. Insects, on the other hand, might
have evolved behavioral strategies to move near plants and pick up these
weak acoustic signals. In conclusion, our study shows that moths are
able to detect and respond to acoustic signals emitted by plants. This
discovery suggests the existence of a third type of acoustic signal that
moths utilize, in addition to those produced by bat echolocation and
moth courtship clicks, raising new questions about the evolution of moth
hearing. We predict that future studies will uncover more examples of
acoustic communication between plants and animals.

Methods

Experimental setup: We collected pupae of S. littoralis that were reared
under controlled breeding conditions (reared on castor bean leaves, 25 ±
1°C, 40% relative humidity with a 12–12 hr light–dark cycle). Newly
emerged female and male moths were placed together until egg-laying was
detected (approximately 2 days). Then, we transferred the females to an
experimental arena. Each arena was 100×50×50 cm³ in size, divided in the
middle by a plastic partition half the height of the arena (Figure 1A).
On the partition, we placed a closed test tube with cotton wool
containing 60% inverted sugar solution for ad libitum feeding throughout
the experiment. Experiment 1 (see below) was performed in a greenhouse
(2.5×4.5×3.5 m³) to simulate optimal conditions for plant development.
The experiments involving acoustic signals (see below Experiments 2, 3,
4, 5, and 6) were performed in an acoustically shielded room (2.5×4×2.5
m³) to prevent acoustic interference. Each of the following treatments
was performed simultaneously in up to four arenas. Moths could choose
between the treatments presented on each side of the arena (see below),
and oviposition was monitored daily for 3 days by counting the number of
egg clusters. At the end of each night, we cleaned the arena of counted
egg clusters using a cloth with ethanol, so that on the subsequent
night, we would not expect there to be evidence of previous oviposition.
We repeated the experiments under the same conditions until acquiring at
least nine nights with egg-laying observations (eggs were not always
laid, which is not surprising given the artificial conditions in the
acoustic room used for these experiments). We refer to the cluster and
not to the individual egg as the moth’s decision unit, because each
cluster requires a decision about the location of oviposition, whereas
the number of eggs could be affected by the general condition of the
female or by external interference. Indeed, there was much variation in
the number of eggs per cluster – 68±134 eggs (mean ± SE). However, to
determine whether counting eggs would have altered our results, we
conducted an experiment comparing cluster counts to individual egg
counts (Experiment 6). For experiments with actual plants, a young
tomato plant (Solanum lycopersicum) in a small pot was used in all
experiments. All the treatments are illustrated in Figure 1A–C. The
number of repetitions of each treatment is noted in Table 1, and data is
presented in Source data 1. To maintain moths’ vitality through the
experiment, we have placed on the starting point (central platform) a
closed test tube with cotton wool containing a 60% sugar solution for ad
libitum feeding.

1.  Drought-stressed vs. well-hydrated plants: We placed a single-stem
    tomato plant, 10 cm high, on either side of the arena. The plant on
    one side was drought-stressed (3 days without watering), and the
    other was thriving and well-hydrated. Moths could lay eggs on either
    plant (Figure 1A).

2.  Playback of a drought-stressed plant vs. silence (without plants):
    Each side contained an oviposition box (10×15×5 cm³ made of 0.5×0.5
    cm² mesh), covered with a paper towel. A speaker playing sounds
    recorded from a drought-stressed tomato plant (Khait et al., 2023)
    was placed under one of the two oviposition boxes (on one side of
    the arena). The speaker played drought sounds at the same intensity
    measured for real plants at a rate of 1 click per minute, with a
    stochastic 10% error in the intervals between clicks (see below for
    details on assessing intensity and playback rate). The oviposition
    box on the other side either had a resistor similar to the speaker
    in shape and identical in impedance to control for potential effects
    of the electric field created by the speaker (though we did not
    account for a magnetic field produced by the speaker, which might as
    well affect the choice) or no resistor (we did not find significant
    differences between the two silent controls, GLMM, p=0.58). The
    experiment was performed twice to strengthen the confidence in its
    results: the first trial was performed during August and September
    2021 and the second during February to May 2022 (a pool of both
    trials and controls – with and without resistors – is presented in
    Figure 1B1). We also repeated this experiment a third time with a
    lower emission rate of 2 clicks per minute (Table 1).

3.  Deaf females in a setup with silence vs. drought-stressed plant
    playback (without a plant): We deafened mated females by puncturing
    their tympanic membrane and placed them in an arena to assess their
    response to drought-stressed sounds, compared to a silent control
    (as described in Experiment 2). Deafening surgical procedure: We
    performed a surgical procedure on female moths to deafen them. The
    procedure involved puncturing the tympanic membrane located at the
    thoracoabdominal juncture using an entomological needle #2. The
    female moths recovered from the procedure within 2 min and were able
    to fly normally. We tested a sample of these females in a standard
    rearing box and found that they were able to lay eggs normally. To
    confirm that the surgery had successfully deafened the females, we
    conducted an inspection by playing a bat playback (the same as
    described below). We deafened a group of 20 moths and compared their
    reactions to a control group of 25 non-deafened moths. During the
    experiment, the moths were released in a dark acoustically isolated
    room (5.5×4.5×2.5 m³) with acoustic foam on the walls and ceiling
    and a single light source (12 W mercury vapor bulb peaked at 1650
    lux), and while they were in flight around the light source, we
    emitted the sound. In the control group, five moths exhibited a
    response (such as falling or a significant change in direction) upon
    hearing the sound (scored by a naïve viewer who did not know whether
    the moths were treated). In contrast, none of the deafened moths
    displayed any reaction to the clicking stimulus (Q=4.5, p=0.03,
    chi-square test).

4.  Well-hydrated plants with and without playback of drought-stressed
    plant sound: There was an oviposition box on each side of the arena.
    One side played drought-stressed sounds while the other remained
    silent, with either a resistor or no sound (same as Experiment 2).
    Additionally, a thriving, healthy tomato plant was placed on each
    oviposition box. This experiment was performed twice, 12 months
    apart, to strengthen the confidence of its results (a pool of both
    trials and controls [with and without resistors] is presented in
    Figure 1B3). To determine the specificity of the response to plant
    sounds, two additional controls were performed.

5.  Male moths: Five males were enclosed under the oviposition box with
    sugar water to maintain them. The control box had only sugar water
    without any moths (Figure 1C). We validated that males in this
    condition produced clicks by recording the sounds emitted by the
    five male moths enclosed overnight in an acoustically isolated
    container, which showed that the males frequently clicked. The test
    was repeated five times and clicks were always emitted by the males
    (Figure 1—figure supplement 1).

Playback

Drought sounds were recorded using an Hm16 Avisoft microphone and an
HM116 Avisoft A/D from a distance of 10 cm in an isolated container with
walls covered with acoustic foam (Khait et al., 2023). These recordings
revealed emission intensities of at least 60 dB SPL (Re 20 µPa) at a
distance of 10 cm. The sounds were played using a Vifa speaker connected
to an Avisoft D/A converter (Player 116).

We ensured that playback sound intensity was similar to that measured in
real plants on the playback side of the arena (i.e. ~60 dB SPL at a
distance of 10 cm) and that sound level on the control side was below
the detection range of our system, i.e., below 30 dB SPL at 10 cm. We
performed four calibration measurements using a calibrated GRAS 40DP
microphone during the period of the experiments to validate that sound
levels had not changed over time. Using the GRAS calibrated microphone,
we also validated that the average sound intensity of the male moth
sequences was the same as that of the playback plant sounds.

Validating the playback rate: The drying plant sounds in the box arenas
(Experiments 2–4, Figure 1B) were played back at a rate of 1 click per
second (1 Hz), with up to 10% error in the intervals (caused by the
computer controlling the system). This frequency is substantially higher
than that found for a single young tomato plant (Khait et al., 2023).
However, the rate that we played (60 clicks per minute) is ecologically
relevant when considering a patch of tomato (or other) plants. To
validate this, we aggregated 45 tomato seedlings in a planting tray
(30×30 cm²) and placed the tray in an empty greenhouse. The plants were
not watered for 3 days, and we recorded sound continuously for 50 hr
(using the same Hm116 microphone setup noted above). When placing the
microphone ~20 cm above the tray – as a flying moth would do, we
measured a maximum click rate of 20 clicks per minute (i.e. 0.33 Hz).
This is threefold slower than the rate we used, but very similar to the
rate that we used in the gradient experiment (see below). Moreover, when
taking into account the moth’s detection range for this emission
intensity, which is likely ~1.5 m at least (Khait et al., 2023), a
female moth could be exposed to a rate over threefold higher (i.e.
higher than 1 Hz) in a patch of drying plants (which would contain more
than 100 seedlings in a typical bush of agricultural or wild hosts
typical of this species). Notably, every plant that we examined was
found to emit similar ultrasonic clicks when dehydrating (Khait et al.,
2023), so this behavior could be relevant to other plants, many of which
grow as dense bushes.

Sound gradient experiment

We used elongated arenas (150×20×5 cm³, Figure 3A). In the center of the
arena (location 0), we placed a closed test tube with cotton wool
containing a 60% sugar solution for ad libitum feeding (to maintain
moths’ vitality). To facilitate accurate measurement of egg distances
from the speaker (location –75), we printed a ruler and placed it along
the bottom of the arena. Each moth was placed at the center of the arena
at the beginning of the experiment. On the next morning, we recorded the
locations of the egg clusters and counted the number of eggs in each
cluster using a stereoscopic microscope, or a magnifying glass if the
eggs were not laid on the ruler. Each female remained in the arena
during the days starting 3 days after emerging from the pupa and mating
and until it died. After each night, we switched the locations of the
speaker and the resistor within the arena. We measured a 30 dB SPL
difference in intensity between the side of the speaker and the side of
the resistor. The clicks were emitted at a frequency of 0.5 clicks per
second (30 per minute).

Tracking the females’ decision-making process

In order to investigate how moths survey the experimental arena and
subsequently engage in a decision-making process, we conducted two
additional trials in which we continuously recorded the movement of the
moths throughout the night. In each trial, we placed four female moths
on a platform in the middle of the arena, in which a speaker played
drought-stressed plant sounds on one side, while on the other, control
side, we placed a silent resistor (as in treatment 3 above). We
exchanged sides between trials and tracked the moths for 6 hr using an
IR camera (Reolink RLC-511-5MP camera) placed above the arena. We then
documented the position of each moth at 12 s intervals using the DLTdv 8
software (Hedrick, 2008). Each individual was recognized according to
its proximity to the last tracking point in order to reconstruct its
full movement. We quantified how many times each individual crossed the
center of the arena (the platform in the center was divided in the
middle) and the proportion of time it spent in each side.

Statistics

GLMMs were used in MATLAB to examine the females’ choice of oviposition.
Random effects were set as intercepts. The number of clusters was set as
the explained variable. The treatment, i.e., playback or control, and
the number of female moths in the arena, was set as a fixed effect. The
number of the arena, the month in which the experiment was performed,
the number of repetitions, and the night of the repetition were
considered as random effects. Because we were analyzing counts (number
of clusters), the model was run using a Poisson distribution. In the
experiments in which we ran two repetitions of the same experiment, we
added the session as another fixed parameter and we also ran the
statistics separately for each session.

To deepen our understanding of the trends observed in the experiments,
we implemented Bayesian model fittings for each choice-based experiment.
In this analysis, ‘oviposition choices’ were considered as distinct
decisions. A value of 1 was assigned when the egg cluster was located on
the side with the active speaker (or on the hydrated plant in the
initial experiment) and a value of 0 was assigned for oviposition on the
opposite side. We employed a Gaussian model, incorporating the number of
females in each experiment as a random effect, with a prior mean of 0.5
and a standard deviation of 0.1. For each experiment, we sampled our
data 16,000 times to calculate the posterior distribution from these
samples. We used a binomial GLMM to determine the effect of the
treatment on the moths’ decision-making. To achieve this, the proportion
of time spent in each side of the arena was set as an explained
variable, the playing side as a fixed effect, with the trial and the
individual moth as random effects. To study the effect of time on the
movement of the moths, we used logistic GLMM in which the accumulated
amount of time spent on the sound-playing side was set as an explained
variable, the time as a fixed effect, and the trial and the individual
moths were set as random effects.

To compare the distribution of eggs in the elongated arena to a random
distribution, we generated an H0 distribution by randomly shuffling the
locations of the speaker and resistor for each laid egg. This
distribution was then compared to our actual egg count distribution
using the K-S test (Figure 3—figure supplement 1).

Acknowledgements

We thank Hadas Marcus for linguistic editing, Tal Erez for providing
moths, Adi Segal, Einav Balachsan, Michael Martynenko, Shira Fraenkel,
Yuval Lustig, and Morad Garam for experimental setup, Nitzan Shahar for
statistical consulting, Aya Goldshtein for reviewing the manuscript and
statistical consulting, Mor Taub for graphic editing, Yonatan Nathan,
and Inon Scharf for reviewing the manuscript. This work was supported by
the European Research Council (ERC) (PLANT BIOACOUSTICS, project
101098318).

Funding Statement

The funders had no role in study design, data collection and
interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.

Contributor Information

Rya Seltzer, Email: ryaseltzer@gmail.com.

Yossi Yovel, Email: yossiyovel@gmail.com.

Youngsung Joo, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea.

Sergio Rasmann, University of Neuchâtel, Switzerland.

Funding Information

This paper was supported by the following grants:

-   European Research Council 10.3030/101001993 to Lilach Hadany.

-   European Research Council 10.3030/101098318 to Lilach Hadany.

Additional information

Competing interests

No competing interests declared.

Author contributions

Conceptualization, Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Validation,
Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft,
Project administration, Writing – review and editing.

Conceptualization, Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Validation,
Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft,
Project administration, Writing – review and editing.

Data curation.

Data curation.

Data curation.

Data curation.

Data curation.

Data curation.

Data curation.

Data curation.

Data curation.

Data curation.

Data curation.

Data curation.

Data curation.

Resources.

Conceptualization, Supervision, Investigation, Writing – review and
editing.

Conceptualization, Supervision, Investigation, Methodology, Writing –
review and editing.

Additional files

MDAR checklist

12768406/9043f0739c5b/elife-104700-mdarchecklist1.pdf?>

Source data 1.

Raw data tables and analysis code that constitute the primary sources for all analyses in this study.

12768406/26200cf7208b/elife-104700-data1.zip?>

Data availability

All tables and codes are available via:
https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/yg7ms8rn37/1.

The following dataset was generated:

Zer G. 2025. Female Moths Incorporate Plant Acoustic Emissions into
Their Oviposition Decision-Making Process. Mendeley Data.

References

Keywords: Convincing

Keywords: Important

This study reveals that female moths use ultrasonic sounds emitted by
dehydrated plants to guide their oviposition decisions. It highlights
sound as an additional sensory modality in host searching, adding an
important piece to the puzzle of how insects and plants interact.
Through convincing experimental approaches, the authors provide insights
that advance our understanding of plant-insect interactions.

Thank you for your thorough reply to my review and for conducting the
additional experiments. All points from my previous review have been
addressed.

This paper presents interesting and fresh approach as it investigates
whether female moths utilize plant-emitted ultrasounds, particularly
those associated with dehydration stress, in their egg-laying
decision-making process. It provides the first empirical evidence
suggesting that acoustic information may contribute to insect-plant
interactions.

The revised version is significantly strengthened by the addition of
supplementary data and improved explanations. The authors present robust
results across multiple experiments, enhancing the credibility of their
conclusions.

Female moths showed a preference for moist, fresh plants over dehydrated
ones in experiments using actual plants. Additionally, when both plants
were fresh but ultrasonic sounds specific to dehydrated plants were
presented from one side, the moths chose the silent plant. However, in
experiments without plants, contrary to the hypothesis derived from the
above results, the moths preferred to oviposit near ultrasonic playback
mimicking the sounds of dehydrated plants.

These results clearly indicate that moths can perceive plant presence
through sound. The findings also highlight the need for future
investigation into the multi-modal nature of moth decision-making, as
acoustic cues alone may not fully explain the behavioral choices
observed across different contexts.

Overall, the results are intriguing, and I think the experiments are
very well designed. The authors successfully demonstrate that
plant-derived acoustic signals influence oviposition behavior in female
moths, thereby achieving the study's objectives. The experimental design
and analysis protocols are reproducible and well suited for adaptation
to other species.

Collection date 2026.

The following is the authors’ response to the original reviews.

  Reviewer #1 (Public review):

  (1) The authors demonstrate that female Spodoptera littoralis moths
  prefer to oviposit on wellwatered tomato plants and avoid
  drought-stressed plants. The study then recorded the sounds produced
  by drought-stressed plants and found that they produce 30 ultrasonic
  clicks per minute. Thereafter, the authors tested the response of
  female S. littoralis moths to clicks with a frequency of 60 clicks per
  minute in an arena with and without plants and in an arena setting
  with two healthy plants of which one was associated with 60 clicks per
  minute. These experiments revealed that in the absence of a plant, the
  moths preferred to lay eggs on the side of the area in which the
  clicks could be heard, while in the presence of a plant the S.
  littoralis females preferred to oviposit on the plant where the clicks
  were not audible. In addition, the authors also tested the response of
  S. littoralis females in which the tympanic membrane had been pierced
  making the moths unable to detect the click sounds. As hypothesised,
  these females placed their eggs equally on both sites of the area.

  Finally, the authors explored whether the female oviposition choice
  might be influenced by the courtship calls of S. littoralis males
  which emit clicks in a range similar to a drought-stressed tomato
  plant. However, no effect was found of the clicks from ten males on
  the oviposition behaviour of the female moths, indicating that the
  females can distinguish between the two types of clicks. Besides these
  different experiments, the authors also investigated the distribution
  of egg clusters within a longer arena without a plant, but with a
  sugar-water feeder. Here it was found that the egg clusters were
  mostly aggregated around the feeder and the speaker producing 60
  clicks per minute. Lastly, video tracking was used to observe the
  behaviour of the area without a plant, which demonstrated

  that the moths gradually spent more time at the arena side with the
  click sounds.

We thank the reviewers for their helpful comments. We agree with the
summary, but would like to note that in the control experiment (Figure
2) we used a click rate of 30 clicks per minute—a design choice driven
by the editor’s feedback. We have clarified this and, to further probe
the system’s dynamics, added a second experiment employing the same
click rate (30 clicks per minute) with a dehydrated plant (see details
below). In both experiments, females again showed a clear tendency to
oviposit nearer the speaker; these findings are described in the updated
manuscript.

  (2) The study addresses a very interesting question by asking whether
  female moths incorporate plant acoustic signals into their oviposition
  choice, unfortunately, I find it very difficult to judge how big the
  influence of the sound on the female choice really is as the
  manuscript does not provide any graphs showing the real numbers of
  eggs laid on the different plants, but instead only provides graphs
  with the Bayesian model fittings for each of the experiments. In
  addition, the numbers given in the text seem to be relatively similar
  with large variations e.g. Figure 1B3: 1.8 {plus minus} 1.6 vs. 1.1
  {plus minus} 1.0. Furthermore, the authors do not provide access to
  any of the raw data or scripts of this study, which also makes it
  difficult to assess the potential impact of this study. Hence, I would
  very much like to encourage the authors to provide figures showing the
  measured values as boxplots including the individual data points,
  especially in Figure 1, and to provide access to all the raw data
  underlying the figures.

We acknowledge that there are researchers who favor Bayesian graphical
representation versus raw data visualization. Therefore, we have added
chartplots of the raw data from Figure 1 in the supplementary section.
We are aware of the duplication in presentation and apologize for this
redundancy.

Regarding the variance and means we obtained in our experiment, we have
analyzed all raw data using the statistical model presented, and if
statistical significance was found despite a particular mean difference
or variance, this is meaningful from a biological perspective. One can
certainly discuss whether this difference has biological importance, but
it should be remembered that in this experimental system, we are trying
to isolate the acoustic signal from a complex system that includes
multiple signals. Therefore, at no point we’ve suggested that this is a
standalone factor, but rather proposed it as an informative and
significant component.

In addition to the experiments described above, we conducted an
experiment in which we counted both eggs and clusters. The results
indicate that cluster counts are a reliable proxy for reproductive
investment at a given location. In this experiment, we present cluster
numbers alongside egg counts (Figure 2).

Furthermore, we apologize for the technical error that prevented our
uploaded data files from reaching the reviewers. We have also uploaded
updated data and code.

  (3) Regarding the analysis of the results, I am also not entirely
  convinced that each night can be taken as an independent egg-laying
  event, as the amount of eggs and the place were the eggs are laid by a
  female moth surely depends on the previous oviposition events. While I
  must admit that I am not a statistician, I would suggest, from a
  biological point of view, that each group of moths should be treated
  as a replicate and not each night. I would therefore also suggest to
  rather analyse the sum of eggs laid over the different consecutive
  nights than taking the eggs laid in each night as an independent data
  point.

We thank the reviewer for this question. This is a valid and point that
we will address in three aspects:

First, regarding our statistical approach, we used a model that takes
into account the sequence of nights and examines whether there is an
effect of the order of nights, i.e., we used GLMMs, with the night
nested within the repetition. This is equivalent to addressing this as a
repeated measure and is, to our best knowledge, the common way to treat
such data.

Second, following the reviewer's comment, we also reran the statistics
of the third experiment (i.e., “sound gradient experiments”, Figure 2
and Supplementary figure 4) when only taking the first night when the
female/s laid eggs to avoid the concern of dependency. This analysis
revealed the same result – i.e., a significant preference for the sound
stimulus. We have now updated our methods and results section to clarify
this point.

Third, an important detail that may not have been clearly specified in
the methods: at the end of each night, we cleaned the arena of counted
egg clusters using a cloth with ethanol, so that on the subsequent
night, we would not expect there to be evidence of previous oviposition
but thus would not exclude some sort of physiological or cognitive
memories. We have now updated our methods section to clarify this
important procedural point.

  (4) Furthermore, it did not become entirely clear to me why a click
  frequency of 60 clicks per minute was used for most experiments, while
  the plants only produce clicks at a range of 30 clicks per minute.
  Independent of the ecological relevance of these sound signals, it
  would be nice if the authors could provide a reason for using this
  frequency range. Besides this, I was also wondering about the argument
  that groups of plants might still produce clicks in the range of 60
  clicks per minute and that the authors' tests might therefore still be
  reasonable. I would agree with this, but only in the case that a group
  of plants with these sounds would be tested. Offering the choice
  between two single plants while providing the sound from a group of
  plants is in my view not the most ecologically reasonable choice. It
  would be great if the authors could modify the argument in the
  discussion section accordingly and further explore the relevance of
  different frequencies and dBlevels.

This is an excellent point. We originally increased the click rate
generate a strong signal. However, it was important for us to verify
that there was ecological relevance in the stimulus we implemented in
the system. For this purpose, we recorded a group of dehydrated plants
at a distance of ~20cm and we measured a click rate of 20 clicks per
minute (i.e., 0.33 Hz) (see Methods section). Therefore, as mentioned at
the beginning of this letter, in the additional experiment described in
Figure 2, we reduced the click frequency to 30 clicks per minute, and at
this lower rate, the effect was maintained. Increasing plant density
would probably lead to a higher rate of 30 clicks per minute.

  (5) Finally, I was wondering how transferable the findings are towards
  insects and Lepidopterans in general. Not all insects possess a
  tympanic organ and might therefore not be able to detect the plant
  clicks that were recorded. Moreover, I would imagine that generalist
  herbivorous like Spodoptera might be more inclined to use these clicks
  than specialists, which very much rely on certain chemical cues to
  find their host plants. It would be great if the authors would point
  more to the fact that your study only investigated a single moth
  species and that the results might therefore only hold true for S.
  littoralis and closely related species, but not necessary for other
  moth species such as Sphingidae or even butterflies.

Good point. Our research uses a specific model system of one moth
species and one plant species in a particular plant-insect interaction
where females select host plants for their offspring. As with any
model-based research that attempts to draw broader conclusions, we've
taken care to distinguish between our direct findings and potential
wider implications. We believe our system may represent mechanisms
relevant to a wider group of herbivorous insects with hearing
capabilities, particularly considering that several moth families and
other insect orders can detect ultrasound. However, additional research
examining more moth and plant species is necessary to determine how
broadly applicable these findings are. We have made these clarifications
in the text.

  Reviewer #2 (Public review):

  (6) The results are intriguing, and I think the experiments are very
  well designed. However, if female moths use the sounds emitted by
  dehydrated plants as cues to decide where to oviposit, the hypothesis
  would predict that they would avoid such sounds. The discussion
  mentions the possibility of a multi-modal moth decision-making process
  to explain these contradictory results, and I also believe this is a
  strong possibility. However, since this remains speculative, careful
  consideration is needed regarding how to interpret the findings based
  solely on the direct results presented in the results section.

Thank you for this insightful observation. We agree that the apparent
attraction of females to dehydrated-plant sounds contradicts our initial
prediction. Having observed this pattern consistently across multiple
setups, we have now added a targeted choice experiment to the revised
manuscript: here female moths were offered a choice between dehydrated
plants broadcasting their natural ultrasonic emissions and a control.
These results—detailed in the Discussion and presented in full in the
Supplementary Materials (Supplementary Figure 4)—show that when only a
dehydrated plant is available, moths would prefer it for oviposition,
supporting our hypothesis that in the absence of a real plant, the
plant’s sounds might represent a plant..

  (7) Additionally, the final results describing differences in
  olfactory responses to drying and hydrated plants are included, but
  the corresponding figures are placed in the supplementary materials.
  Given this, I would suggest reconsidering how to best present the
  hypotheses and clarify the overarching message of the results. This
  might involve reordering the results or re-evaluating which data
  should appear in the main text versus the supplementary materials

Thank you for this suggestion. We have reorganized the manuscript and
removed the olfactory response data from the current version to maintain
a focused narrative on acoustic cues. We agree that a detailed
investigation of multimodal interactions deserves a separate study,
which we plan to pursue in future work.

  (8) There were also areas where more detailed explanations of the
  experimental methods would be beneficial.

Thank you for highlighting this point. We have expanded and clarified
the Methods section to provide comprehensive detail on our experimental
procedures.

  Reviewer #1 (Recommendations for the authors):

  (9) Line 1: Please include the name of the species you tested also in
  the title as your results might not hold true for all moth species.

We do not fully agree with this comment. Please see comment 5.

  (10) Line 19-20: Please rephrase the sentence so that it becomes clear
  that the "dehydration stress" refers to the plant and not to the
  moths.

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly

  (11) Line 31: Male moths might provide many different signals to the
  females, maybe better "male sound signals" or similar.

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (12) Line 52-53: Maybe mention here that not all moth species have
  evolved these abilities.

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (13) Line 77: add a space after 38.

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (14) Line 88: Maybe change "secondary predators" to "natural enemies".

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (15) Line 134: Why is "notably" in italics? I would suggest using
  normal spelling/formatting rules here.

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (16) Line 140-144: If you did perform the experiment also with the
  more ecological relevant playback rate, why not present these findings
  as your main results and use the data with the higher playback
  frequency as additional support?

Thank you for this suggestion. We agree that the ecologically relevant
playback data are important; as described in detail at the beginning of
this letter and also in comment 4, however, to preserve a clear and
cohesive narrative, we have maintained the original ordering of this
section. Nevertheless, the various experiments conducted in Figure 1
differ in several components from Figure 2 and the work that examined
sounds in plant groups in the appendices. Therefore, we find it more
appropriate to use them as supporting evidence for the main findings
rather than creating a comparison between different experimental
systems. For this reason, we chose to keep them as a separate
description in "The ecological playback findings (Lines 140–144) remain
fully described in the Results and serve to reinforce the main
observations without interrupting the manuscript's flow.

(17) Line 146: Please explain already here how you deafened the moths.

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (18) Line 181: should it be "male moths' " ?

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (19) Line 215: Why is "without a plant" in italics? I would suggest
  using normal spelling/formatting rules here.

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (20) Line 234: I do not understand why this type of statistic was used
  to analyse the electroantennogram (EAG) results. Would a rather simple
  Student's t-test or a Wilcon rank sum test not have been sufficient? I
  would also like to caution you not to overinterpret the data derived
  from the EAG, as you combined the entire headspace into one mixture it
  is no longer possible to derive information on the different volatiles
  in the blends. The differences you observe might therefore mostly be
  due to the amount of emitted volatiles.

We have reorganized the manuscript and removed the olfactory response
data from the current version to maintain a focused narrative on
acoustic cues (See comment 7).

  (21) Line 268: It might be nice to add an additional reference here
  referring to the multimodal oviposition behaviour of the moths.

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (22) Line 284: If possible, please add another reference here
  referring to the different cues used by moths during oviposition.

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (23) Line 336: What do you mean by "closed together"?

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (24) Line 434-436: Please see my overall comments. I do not think that
  you can call it ecologically relevant if the signal emitted by
  multiple plants is played in the context of just a single plant.

Please see comments 1 and 4.

  (25) Line 496: Please change "stats" to statistics.

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (26) Line 522-524: I am not sure whether simply listing their names
  does give full credit to the work these people did for your study.
  Maybe also explain how they contributed to your work.

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  Reviewer #2 (Recommendations for the authors):

  (27) L54 20-60kHz --> 20Hz-60kHz or 20kHz - 60kHz?

OK. We have replaced it.

  (28) L124 Are the results for the condition where nothing was placed
  and the condition where a decoy silent resistor was placed combined in
  the analysis? If so, were there no significant differences between the
  two conditions? Comparing these with a condition presenting
  band-limited noise in the same frequency range as the drought-stressed
  sounds might also have been an effective approach to further isolate
  the specific role of the ultrasonic emissions.

We have used both conditions due to technical constrains and pooled them
tougher for analysis— statistical tests confirmed no significant
differences between them—and this clarification has now been added to
the Methods section including the results of the statistical test.

  (29) L125 (Fig. 1A), see Exp. 1 in the Methods. -> (Fig.1B. See Exp.1
  in the Methods).

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (30) L132 "The opposite choice to what was seen in the initial
  experiment (Fig.1B)"

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (31) L137-143 If you are writing about results, why not describe them
  with figures and statistics? The current description reads like a
  discussion.

These findings were not among our primary research questions; however,
we believe that including them in the Results section underscores the
experimental differences. In our opinion, introducing an additional
figure or expanding the statistical analysis at this point would disrupt
the narrative flow and risk confusing the reader.

  (32) L141 "This is higher than the rate reported for a single young
  plant" Are you referring to the tomato plants used in the experiments?
  It might be helpful to include in the main text the natural click rate
  emitted by tomato plants, as this information is currently only
  mentioned in the Methods section.

See comment 4.

  (33) L191 Is the main point here to convey that the plant playback
  effect remained significant even when the sound presentation frequency
  was reduced to 30 clicks per minute? The inclusion of the feeder
  element, however, seems to complicate the message. To simplify the
  results, moving the content from lines 185-202 to the supplementary
  materials might be a better approach. Additionally, what is the
  rationale for placing the sugar solution in the arena? Is it to
  maintain the moths' vitality during the experiment? Clarifying this in
  the methods section would help provide context for this experimental
  detail.

In this series of experiments, we manipulated four variables—single
moths, ultrasonic click rate, arena configuration (from a two-choice
design to an elongated enclosure), and the response metric (total egg
counts rather than cluster counts)—to evaluate moth oviposition under
more ecologically realistic conditions. We demonstrate the system’s
robustness and validity in a more realistic setting (by tracking
individual moths, counting single eggs, etc.).

As noted in the text, feeders were included to preserve the moths’
natural behavior and vitality. We have further clarified this in the
revised manuscript.

  (34) L215 Is the click presentation frequency 30 or 60 per minute?
  Since Figure 3 illustrates examples of moth movement from the
  experiment described in Figure 1, it might be more effective to
  present Figure 3 when discussing the results of Figure 1 or to include
  it in the supplementary materials for better clarity and organization.

See comments 1 and 4. As mentioned in the above

  (35) L291 Please provide a detailed explanation of the experiments and
  measurements for the results shown in Figure S3 (and Figure S2). If
  the multi-modal hypothesis discussed in the study is a key focus, it
  might be better to include these results in the main results section
  rather than in the supplementary materials.

Thank you for this suggestion. Figure S2 was removed, see comments
above. We’ve added now the context to figure S3.

  (36) L303 It might be helpful to include information about the
  relationship between the moth species used in this study and tomato
  plants somewhere in the text. This would provide an important context
  for understanding the ecological relevance of the experiments.

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (37) Table 1 The significant figures in the numbers presented in the
  tables should be consistent.

Thank you for the suggestion; we have clarified the text accordingly.

  (38) L341 The text mentions that experiments were conducted in a
  greenhouse, but does this mean the arena was placed inside the
  greenhouse? Also, the term "arena" is used - does this refer to a
  sealed rectangular case or something similar? For the sound
  presentation experiments, it seems that the arena cage was placed
  inside a soundproof room. If the arena is indeed a case-like
  structure, were there any specific measures taken to prevent sound
  scattering within the case, such as the choice of materials or
  structural modifications?

Here, “arena” refers to the plastic boxes used throughout this study. In
this particular experiment, we presented plants alone—reflecting ongoing
debate in the literature—and used these trials as a baseline for our
subsequent sound-presentation experiments, during which we measured
sound intensity as described in the Methods section. All sound-playback
experiments were conducted in sound-proof rooms, and acoustic levels
were measured beforehand—sound on the control side fell below our
system’s detection threshold.

  (39) L373 "resister similar to the speaker" Could you explain it in
  more detail? I think this would depend on the type of speaker
  used-particularly whether it includes magnets. From an experimental
  perspective, presenting different sounds such as white noise from the
  speaker might have been a better control. Was there a specific reason
  for not doing so? Additionally, the study does not clearly demonstrate
  whether the electric and magnetic field environments on both sides of
  the arena were appropriately controlled. Without this information, it
  is difficult to evaluate whether using a resistor as a substitute was
  adequate.

Thank you for this comment. We have now addressed this point in the
Discussion. We acknowledge that we did not account for the magnetic
field, which might have differed between the speaker and the resistor.
We agree that using an alternative control, such as white noise, could
have been informative, and we now mention this as a limitation in the
revised Methods.

  (40) L435 60Hz? The representation of frequencies in the text is
  inconsistent, with some values expressed in Hz and others as "clicks
  per second." It would be better to standardize these units for
  clarity, such as using Hz throughout the manuscript.

We agree that this is confusing. We reviewed the text and made sure that
when we addressed click per second, we meant how many clicks were
produced and when we addressed Hz units it was in the context of sound
frequencies.

  (41) L484 "we quantified how many times each individual crossed the
  center of the arena" Is this data being used in the results?

Yes. Mentioned in the text just before Figure 3. L220

Data Citations

Supplementary Materials

MDAR checklist

12768406/9043f0739c5b/elife-104700-mdarchecklist1.pdf?>

Source data 1.

Raw data tables and analysis code that constitute the primary sources for all analyses in this study.

12768406/26200cf7208b/elife-104700-data1.zip?>

Data Availability Statement

All tables and codes are available via:
https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/yg7ms8rn37/1.

The following dataset was generated:

Zer G. 2025. Female Moths Incorporate Plant Acoustic Emissions into
Their Oviposition Decision-Making Process. Mendeley Data.
